Public Works Commission
Agenda Report

Public Works
Commission Meeting
09-22-21
Item
4.A.

To:

Chair Simmens and Members of the Public Works Commission

Prepared by:

Troy Spayd, Assistant Public Works Director/City Engineer

Approved by:

Rob DuBoux, Public Works Director/City Engineer

Date prepared: September 13, 2021

Meeting date: September 22, 2021

Subject:

Capital Improvement Projects and Disaster Recovery Projects Status
Report

RECOMMENDED ACTION: Receive and file report on the status of the City’s current and
upcoming Capital Improvements Projects and Disaster Recovery Projects.

DISCUSSION: Staff will provide a status update on the following active projects in the
Fiscal Year 2021-2022 Capital Improvement Program:

Capital Improvement Projects (Design)

Marie Canyon Green Streets
Updates:

The City has received Measure W funds to complete this project. Staff

is working on the project plans to prepare for public bidding.

Project Schedule:

Complete Design: September 2021
Begin Construction: Winter 2021

PCH Median Improvements Project

Updates:

Consultant is working on the final design changes. In August, the City
released a request for proposals from consultants to perform
construction management services with proposals due in September.
September 8, 2021, staff received the project’s CDP from the Planning
Commission. Staff is coordinating with Caltrans for the final project
approvals.
Project Schedule:

Complete Design: Fall 2021

Page 1 of 7

Agenda Item # 4.A.

















Begin Construction: Winter 2021/2022

PCH Signal Synchronization System Improvements Project

Updates:

Consultant submitted 95% design documents in June 2021 we have

(cid:131)

received some comments to those plans.
In August, the City released a request for proposals from consultants
to perform construction management services with proposals due in
September. The project is not yet scheduled for Planning Commission
hearing, but the request has been made.

Project Schedule:

Complete Final Design: October 2021
Advertise: November 2021
Award Contract and Begin Construction: Winter 2021/2022

Civic Center Stormwater Diversion Structure

Updates:

Project bids were received on September 7, 2021. Staff will be bringing
a construction contract to City Council at the October 11, 2021 meeting.

Project Schedule:

Final Design: Completed.
Bids Received: September 7, 2021
Begin Construction: October 2021

Westward Beach Road Improvements Project

Updates:

The project requires coordination with Los Angeles County Beaches
and Harbor. Staff is working out the final details of the project with the
County and will be finalizing the design.

Project Schedule:

Complete Design: Fall 2021
Begin Construction: Winter 2021/2022

Civic Center Water Treatment Facility Phase 2

Updates:
(cid:131)

Individual letters were mailed to all properties within Phase 2 with their
preliminary estimated assessments. Staff has been communicating
with the property owners regarding their proposed assessments.

The City requested a modification of the MOU to revise the due date of
the assessment district formation from November 5, 2021 to June 30,
2022.

Staff has mailed easement documents to property owners for review

and execution

(cid:131)

Page 2 of 7

Agenda Item # 4.A.









Project Schedule:

Complete Design: December 2021
Advertise for Bidding: February 2022
Begin Construction: Fall 2022

Bluffs Park Shade Structure

Project Description: This project consists of the installation of four single-post

shade structures at Malibu Bluffs Park.

Estimated Schedule:

Complete Design: Fall 2021
Begin Construction: Fall 2021

Permanent Skate Park

Project Description: This project includes the designing and constructing a
permanent skate park located on the Crummer/Case Court parcel adjacent
to Malibu Bluffs Park. The project would include parking and additional site
amenities such as trash cans, benches, tables, and restrooms.

Estimated Schedule:

Complete Design: Fall 2021
Begin Construction: To be determined

Capital Improvement Projects (Construction)

Malibu Park Drainage Improvements

Project Description: This project consists of storm drain repairs within the
Malibu Park neighborhood. These repairs are the result of damage caused
by the subsequent storms after the Woolsey Fire. Work will include clearing
and grubbing, demolition, cold milling, removal of existing corrugated metal
pipe, new asphalt berms/dikes, pavement repairs, pavement overlay, striping,
new reinforced concrete pipes, and rock slope protection.

Updates: Construction continues at the Morning View location. The new 60"
HDPE pipe has been installed and the contractor continues to construct the
new basins and backfill around the new headwall. The contractor will also
begin working at the other locations per the project plans and specifications.
Work will include temporary lane closures with flaggers.

Project Schedule: August 2021 through October 2021

2021 Annual Street Maintenance

Project Description: This project provides for the reconstruction and
maintenance of City streets. Including asphalt pavement repairs, Type II
slurry seal, speed humps and new thermoplastic striping.

Updates: The contractor has mobilized and continues to perform the
necessary work per the contract plans and specifications. To date all the
pavement repairs, crack seal work and new speed humps on Birdview Ave

Page 3 of 7

Agenda Item # 4.A.








have been completed. Crews will continue removing existing striping and
pavement markers in preparation for next weeks scheduled slurry seal work.

Project Schedule: August 2021 through October 2021

Capital Improvement Projects (Not Started)

Vehicle Protection Devices

Project Description: Per Malibu Municipal Code Section 17.48.070 requires
vehicle impact protection devices to be installed for all parking spaces located
adjacent to any outdoor pedestrian seating area. There are two locations
within the City’s right-of-way and City-owned property that would require a
vehicle impact protection device.

Legacy Park Paver Repair Project

Project Description: This project will consist of removing and repairing a large
section of pavers in Legacy Park. The pavers have become uneven and
damaged in several areas

Malibu Bluffs Park South Walkway

Project Description: This project will include replacing the existing sidewalk

located on the south side of Malibu Bluffs Park.

Trancas Playground Resurfacing

Project Description: The project will include removing and replacing the upper

layer of the playground surfacing at Trancas Canyon Park.

PCH Overhead Warning Signs

Project Description: This project was identified in the PCH Safety Study and
installation of overhead warning signs on PCH near

includes
Moonshadows restaurant and Big Rock Drive.

the

PCH at Trancas Canyon Road Right Turn Lane

Project Description: This project consists of installing a new westbound right

turn lane at the intersection of PCH and Trancas Canyon Road.

Capital Improvement Projects (Completed)

Civic Center Way Improvements

Updates: The contractor has completed the planting material maintenance
period as described within the project documents. Council accepted this
project as complete at the September 13th City Council Meeting.

Disaster Projects (Design)

Broad Beach Road Water Quality Infrastructure Repairs (CalJPIA Project)

Page 4 of 7

Agenda Item # 4.A.














Updates:

The project consultant prepared the specifications for the project. Staff

is finalizing the bid documents.

Project Schedule:

Complete Design: Fall 2021
Begin Construction: Fall/Winter 2021

Latigo Canyon Road Roadway/Retaining Wall Improvements (FEMA Project)

Updates:

Staff is finalizing the design of this project.
Staff is also working with FEMA/CalOES to substitute the existing

timber with non-combustible materials.

Project Schedule

Complete Design: Fall 2021
Begin Construction: Winter 2021/2022

Trancas Canyon Park Planting and Irrigation Repairs (CalJPIA/FEMA Project)

Updates:

The project consultant has started the design of this project.

Project Schedule:

Complete Design: Summer 2021
Begin Construction: Summer/Fall 2021

Trancas Canyon Park Slope Stabilization Project (CalJPIA Project)

Updates:

The project consultant has started the design of this project.

Project Schedule:

Complete Design: Summer 2021
Begin Construction: Summer/Fall 2021

Birdview Avenue Improvements (CalOES Project)

Updates:

The design of this project has been included in the Malibu Park
Drainage Improvements project and updates will be provided under
that project.

Outdoor Warning Sirens (FEMA Project)

Updates: This project will be funded through a grant from FEMA after the
Wooley Fire. Staff received proposals from consultants to design and to
develop a plan that includes the evaluation of a siren system and possible
locations. It is anticipated a consultant will be hired in October 2021.

Project Schedule:

Complete Design: Unknown

Storm Drain Master Plan (FEMA Project)

Page 5 of 7

Agenda Item # 4.A.









Project Description: This project will be funded through a grant from FEMA
after the Woolsey Fire. The City will create a complete inventory of storm
drains, culverts, debris basins, manholes, and other drainage structures
within the City.

Updates: An RFQ was released in August 2021 seeking qualified consultants

to develop the master plan. Proposals are due in September 2021.

Estimated Schedule:

Completion Date: Spring 2022

Disaster Projects (Construction)
None at this time

Disaster Projects (Completed)
Guardrail Replacement Citywide (FEMA Project)

Project Description: This project consisted of replacing the damaged

guardrail throughout the City as a result of the Woolsey Fire.

Corral Canyon Road Bridge Repairs (FEMA Project)

Project Description: This project consisted of replacing fire damaged existing
fencing and repairing the damaged embankment adjacent to the bridge.

Corral Canyon Culvert Repairs (FEMA Project)

Project Description: This project has been cancelled as it could not get FEMA

approval.

Disaster Projects (Not Started)
Clover Heights Storm Drain (FEMA Project)

Project Description: This project consists of design and construction of a few
storm drains on Clover Heights. The existing storm drain facility ends at the
intersection of Clover Heights and Harvester Road. During storms, this
intersection floods and causes debris to block the road. An extended storm
drain towards the end of Clover Heights will help eliminate this issue.

Estimated Schedule:

Complete Design: Spring 2022
Begin Construction: Summer 2022

Latigo Canyon Road Culvert Repairs (FEMA Project)

Project Description: This project consists of repairing the existing storm drain
on Latigo Canyon Road located approximately 2,500 feet from PCH that was
damaged by the Woolsey Fire.

Estimated Schedule:

Complete Design: Winter 2021/2022
Begin Construction: Spring 2022

Encinal Canyon Road Drainage Improvements (CalOES Project)

Page 6 of 7

Agenda Item # 4.A.










Project Description: This project consists of repairing damage storm drain
facilities and roadway embankments that were damaged by the Woolsey Fire.

Estimated Schedule:

Complete Design: Winter 2021/2022
Begin Construction: Spring 2022

Malibu Road Slope Repairs (CalOES Project)

Project Description: The existing slope adjacent to the beach access stairs
at 24712 Malibu Road has been eroded and caused damage to Malibu Road.

Estimated Schedule:

Complete Design: Fall 2021
Begin Construction: Winter 2021

Westward Beach Road Shoulder Repairs (CalOES Project)

Project Description: The project consists of repairs the damaged shoulder on

Westward Beach Road.

Estimated Schedule:

Complete Design: Fall 2021
Begin Construction: Winter 2021

Page 7 of 7

Agenda Item # 4.A.






