NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

OVERNIGHT EXPRESS DELIVERY 

April 13, 2023 

Ms. Ginger Richman 
President 
Adelphia Gateway, LLC 
1416 Wyckoff Road 
PO BOX 1464 
Wall, New Jersey 07719 

Dear Ms. Richman: 

CPF 1-2023-022-NOPV 

From April 4th, 2022, through August 17th, 2022, of the on-site inspection, a representative of the 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA) pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 
United  States  Code  (U.S.C.)  inspected  Adelphia  Gateway,  LLC’s  (Adelphia)  pipeline  facilities 
from Quakertown, PA to Martins Creek, PA. 

As  a  result  of  the  inspection,  it  is  alleged  that  you  have  committed  probable  violations  of  the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The items inspected 
and the probable violations are: 

1. 

§ 192.481 Atmospheric corrosion control: Monitoring. 

(a) … 
(c)  If  atmospheric  corrosion  is  found  during  an  inspection,  the 
operator must provide protection against the corrosion as required by 
§ 192.479. 

Adelphia  failed  to  provide  protection  against  atmospheric  corrosion  found.  Specifically, 
atmospheric corrosion first identified in 2018 were not protected against the corrosion. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
During  the  inspection,  PHMSA  conducted  field  observations  at  the  Columbia  Interchange  in 
Northampton County, PA. Two valves were observed to be subject to atmospheric corrosion at 
that location: the G-11 valve, and the unnumbered valve which is the test point for odorization (the 
unnumbered  valve).  In  the  2018 Atmospheric  Inspection  Report,  both  the  G-11  valve,  and  the 
unnumbered  valve  were  documented  to  be  corroded.  Remediation  subsequent  to  the  2018 
Atmospheric Inspection was documented in a report titled Remediation Conducted per the 2018 
Atmospheric  Corrosion  Report  conducted  by  Integrity  Solutions,  dated  4/29/19  (2018 
Remediation Report). Neither the G-11 valve, nor the unnumbered valve were listed in the 2018 
Remediation Report. Furthermore, the 2021 Atmospheric Inspection Report did not identify the 
G-11 valve or the unnumbered valve as being observed to have atmospheric corrosion. 

Therefore, Adelphia failed to provide protection against atmospheric corrosion as required by § 
192.481. 

2. 

§ 192.605 Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a)  General.  Each  operator  shall  prepare  and  follow  for  each 
pipeline, a manual of written procedures for conducting operations and 
maintenance activities and for emergency response. For transmission 
lines, the manual must also include procedures for handling abnormal 
operations. This manual must be reviewed and updated by the operator 
at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar 
year.  This  manual  must  be  prepared  before  operations  of  a  pipeline 
system  commence.  Appropriate  parts  of  the  manual  must  be  kept  at 
locations where operations and maintenance activities are conducted. 

Adelphia  failed  to  follow  its  manual  of  written  procedures  for  conducting  operations  and 
maintenance  activities.  Specifically, Adelphia  failed  to  follow  its  Operations  and  Maintenance 
Manual, issued February 2021, Section 3.3.10 (Flange Installation Specification) by not installing 
stud bolts on flange joints at the G75 Valve Setting with at least one thread visible on each end of 
a stud bolt. 

The  Flange  Installation  Specification  stated  in  part  regarding  flange  installations  that:  “When 
tightened, the bolt must extend completely through the nut. At least one thread should be visible 
on each end of a stud bolt.” 

During the inspection, PHMSA observed numerous instances of stud bolts installed at the G-75 
Bushkill Creek Valve Setting that failed to extend a minimum of one thread past the nut on each 
side of the flange as required by Adelphia’s Flange Installation Specification. 

Therefore,  Adelphia  failed  to  comply  §  192.605(a)  by  not  to  following  its  manual  of  written 
procedures regarding flange installation. 

3. 

§ 192.605 Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a)  General.  Each  operator  shall  prepare  and  follow  for  each 
pipeline, a manual of written procedures for conducting operations and 
maintenance activities and for emergency response. For transmission 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
lines, the manual must also include procedures for handling abnormal 
operations. This manual must be reviewed and updated by the operator 
at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar 
year.  This  manual  must  be  prepared  before  operations  of  a  pipeline 
system  commence.  Appropriate  parts  of  the  manual  must  be  kept  at 
locations where operations and maintenance activities are conducted. 

Adelphia  failed  to  follow  its  manual  of  written  procedures  for  conducting  operations  and 
maintenance  activities.  Specifically,  Adelphia  failed  to  follow  its  Operations  and  Maintenance 
Manual,  Revision  E,  March  2022,  Section  15.7.5.1  (Permanent  Pipeline  Markers  Procedure) 
regarding maintenance of permanent pipeline markers on the right-of-way adjacent to Route 611 
in Northampton County, PA and Route 212 in Bucks County, PA, pursuant to § 192.605(a) and 
§ 192.707(a)1. 

During the inspection, PHMSA observed the right-of-way adjacent to Route 611 in Northampton 
County,  PA  and  Route  212  in  Bucks  County,  PA.  No  line-of-sight  observation  of  permanent 
pipeline markers could be made on the right-of-way due to overgrowth with brush. Adelphia’s 
Permanent Pipeline Markers Procedure imply placement and maintenance of pipeline markers to 
attain line of sight at preferred locations, where practical.  The right-of-way was overgrown with 
brush  to  the  extent  of  rendering  line-of-site  observation  of  permanent  pipeline  markers 
unattainable. 

Therefore, Adelphia failed to follow the requirements of § 192.605(a), and §192.707(a) as they 
apply to Adelphia’s Permanent Pipeline Markers Procedure. 

4. 

§ 192.605 Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a)  General.  Each  operator  shall  prepare  and  follow  for  each 
pipeline, a manual of written procedures for conducting operations and 
maintenance activities and for emergency response. For transmission 
lines, the manual must also include procedures for handling abnormal 
operations. This manual must be reviewed and updated by the operator 
at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar 
year.  This  manual  must  be  prepared  before  operations  of  a  pipeline 
system  commence.  Appropriate  parts  of  the  manual  must  be  kept  at 
locations where operations and maintenance activities are conducted. 

Adelphia  failed  to  follow  its  manual  of  written  procedures  for  conducting  operations  and 
maintenance  activities.  Specifically,  Adelphia  failed  to  follow  its  Operations  and  Maintenance 
Manual, revision E, March 2022, Section 16.18.2 Valve Security (Valve Security Procedure) by 

1 § 192.707 Line markers for mains and transmission lines. 
(a) Buried pipelines. Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, a line marker must be placed and 
maintained as close as practical over each buried main and transmission line: 
(1) At each crossing of a public road and railroad; and 
(2) Wherever necessary to identify the location of the transmission line or main to reduce the possibility of damage 
or interference 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
failing  to  protect  transmission  line  valves  from  vandalism  and  unauthorized  operations  at  the 
Columbia Interchange site. 

Adelphia’s  Valve  Security  Procedure  stated  in  part  that  “All  valves  shall  be  protected  from 
vandalism and unauthorized operations. Security may be provided by locks on the valve or location 
within locked fences or buildings.” 

During  the  inspection,  PHMSA  observed  multiple  gaps  under  the  fence  at  the  Columbia 
Interchange valve site in  Northampton County, PA. Not all valves were locked, and the gaps under 
the  fence  provided  possible  access  to  individuals  desirous  of  conducting  vandalism  and 
unauthorized operation of valves at the site. 

Therefore, Adelphia failed to follow its Valve Security Procedure as required per  § 192.605(a). 

5. 

§ 192.605 Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a)  General.  Each  operator  shall  prepare  and  follow  for  each 
pipeline, a manual of written procedures for conducting operations and 
maintenance activities and for emergency response. For transmission 
lines, the manual must also include procedures for handling abnormal 
operations. This manual must be reviewed and updated by the operator 
at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar 
year.  This  manual  must  be  prepared  before  operations  of  a  pipeline 
system  commence.  Appropriate  parts  of  the  manual  must  be  kept  at 
locations where operations and maintenance activities are conducted. 

Adelphia  failed  to  follow  its  manual  of  written  procedures  for  conducting  operations  and 
maintenance activities. Specifically, Adelphia failed to follow its Painting & Coating Procedure, 
December 2016, Section 10 Contractor Required Documentation (Coating Procedure) regarding 
documenting materials used for its 18” Mainline Station 4009+44 anomaly investigation. 

Adelphia’s  Coating  Procedure  required  “Daily  Reports  to  detail  environmental  conditions, 
materials used, results from in process inspections, and a summary of the work completed during 
the day/shift. An example of an acceptable Daily Report form which may be used is provided in 
Section 11.1.” The example report found in Section 11.1 included extensive information regarding 
the coating system used and its application. 

During  the  inspection,  PHMSA  reviewed  repair  records  for  Adelphia’s  18”  Mainline  Station 
4009+44 anomaly investigation. Adelphia’s Pipeline Investigation Report listed the ‘New Coating 
Type’ by manufacturer as Denso; however, the actual coating product and other materials used 
was not documented. 

Therefore, Adelphia failed to follow its Coating Procedure as required by § 192.605(a). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposed Compliance Order 

Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a related 
series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before January 6, 
2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the violation persists, 
up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or 
after May 3, 2021 and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not exceed $225,134 
per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for a related series of 
violations.  For  violation  occurring  on  or  after  January  11,  2021  and  before  May  3,  2021,  the 
maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a 
maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after July 
31,  2019  and  before  January  11,  2021,  the  maximum  penalty  may  not  exceed  $218,647  per 
violation  per  day the violation  persists,  up to  a maximum  of  $2,186,465  for  a  related  series  of 
violations.  For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before July 31, 2019, the 
maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to 
exceed $2,132,679.  For violation occurring on or after November 2, 2015 and before November 
27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per violation per day, with a maximum 
penalty not to exceed $2,090,022. 

We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved in this case, and have 
decided not to propose a civil penalty assessment at this time. 

With respect to Item 2, pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Adelphia Gateway, LLC.  Please refer to 
the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this Notice. 

Warning Items 

With respect to Items 1, 3, 4, and 5, we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents 
involved in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action or penalty 
assessment proceedings at this time.  We advise you to promptly correct these items.  Failure to 
do so may result in additional enforcement action. 

Response to this Notice 

Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators in 
Enforcement  Proceedings.  Please  refer  to  this  document  and  note  the  response  options.  Be 
advised that all material you submit in response to this enforcement action is subject to being made 
publicly  available.  If  you  believe  that  any  portion  of  your  responsive  material  qualifies  for 
confidential treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b), along with the complete original document you 
must provide a second copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential 
treatment redacted and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for 
confidential treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Following the receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to  respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a  waiver  of  your  right  to  contest  the  allegations  in  this  Notice  and  authorizes  the  Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  The Region Director 
may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted demonstrating good 
cause for an extension. 

In  your  correspondence  on  this  matter,  please  refer  to  CPF  1-2023-022-NOPV  and,  for  each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

Sincerely, 

P.P. 

Robert Burrough 

Director, Eastern Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to Adelphia Gateway, LLC (Adelphia) a Compliance 
Order incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of Adelphia 
with the pipeline safety regulations: 

A. 

B. 

In regard to Item 2 of the Notice pertaining to stud bolts on flange joints at G-75 
Bushkill Creek Valve Setting, Adelphia must replace stud bolts that were 
improperly installed at G-75 Valve Setting with stud bolts that meet the 
requirements of Adelphia’s Flange Installation Specification. within 270 days of 
receipt of the Final Order. 

It  is requested (not mandated) that Adelphia Gateway, LLC maintain 
documentation of the safety improvement costs associated with fulfilling this 
Compliance Order and submit the total to Robert Burrough, Director, Eastern 
Region, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration.  It is requested 
that these costs be reported in two categories: 1) total cost associated with 
preparation/revision of plans, procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost 
associated with replacements, additions and other changes to pipeline 
infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
