NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
PROPOSED CIVIL PENALTY 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: dwortman@urc.com 

May 5, 2023 

Mr. Dave Wortman 
Vice President, Supply and Transportation 
Kiantone Pipeline Corp 
15 Bradley Street 
PO BOX 780 
Warren, Pennsylvania 16365 

Dear Mr. Wortman: 

CPF 1-2023-013-NOPV 

From  April  25,  2022  through  May  20,  2022,  a  representative  of  the  Pipeline  and  Hazardous 
Materials  Safety  Administration  (PHMSA)  pursuant  to  Chapter  601  of  49  United  States  Code 
(U.S.C.) conducted an inspection of Kiantone Pipeline Corp’s (Kiantone) procedures, records, and 
field observations in Warren, Pennsylvania. 

As  a  result  of  the  inspection,  it  is  alleged  that  you  have  committed  probable  violations  of  the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).  The items inspected 
and the probable violations are: 

1. 

§ 194.7 Operating restrictions and interim operating authorization. 

(a) … 
(b)  An  operator  must  operate  its  onshore  pipeline  facilities  in 

accordance with the applicable response plan. 

Kiantone failed to follow its response plan regarding response equipment testing.  Specifically, 
Kiantone  failed  to  operate  its  facilities  in  accordance  with  its  response  plan  when  it  did  not 
routinely test its spill response equipment at its Warren, Pennsylvania facility during 2020 and 
2021 in accordance with the Facility Response Plan, dated 02/11/22 (FRP) under § 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
194.107(c)(1)(viii).  Section 194.107(c)(1)(viii) requires that a facility response plan must include 
equipment testing. 

During  the  inspection,  PHMSA  reviewed  the  FRP.  FRP  Section  3-E  stated  in  part  that 
“Kiantone's/URC’s  response  equipment  is  exercised and maintained  by the spill response team 
twice  a  year.  Inspections  and  inventory  are  made  monthly  and  logged  in  a  journal  kept  at  the 
facility...” 

PHMSA  requested  recent  records  for  the  spill  response  equipment  inspections  required  under 
Section 3-E of the FRP in Warren, Pennsylvania.  Kiantone was unable to produce any response 
plan inspection and equipment testing records for 2020 and 2021. 

Therefore,  Kiantone  failed  to  follow  its  response  plan  regarding  response  equipment  testing  in 
accordance with § 194.7(b). 

2. 

§ 195.402 Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a) General. Each operator shall prepare and follow for each 

pipeline system a manual of written procedures for conducting 
normal operations and maintenance activities and handling abnormal 
operations and emergencies. This manual shall be reviewed at 
intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar 
year, and appropriate changes made as necessary to insure that the 
manual is effective. This manual shall be prepared before initial 
operations of a pipeline system commence, and appropriate parts 
shall be kept at locations where operations and maintenance activities 
are conducted. 

Kiantone  failed  to  follow  its  written  procedures.  Specifically,  Kiantone  failed  to  follow  its 
Operations,  Maintenance  &  Emergency  Response  Procedures  Manual,  dated  03/07/22  (OME) 
Section 19.3 and  Facility Response Plan, dated 02/11/22  (FRP)  regarding emergency  response 
training in accordance with § 195.402(a). 

Section 19.3 of the OME stated, in part, under “Training” that “Kiantone personnel receive training 
in  the  use  of  Company  emergency  response  procedures.  The  training  includes  “table-top” 
discussions of emergency scenarios.”  Section 19.3 further states“[s]imulated emergency response 
drills are normally conducted twice per year, but at least annually, to further ensure appropriate 
actions in the event of an emergency.” 

Further, Section 7 of the FRP stated in  part that “It is  the responsibility of  management  of the 
facility  to  ensure  that  the  response  resources  identified  in  this  plan  participate  in  an  annual 
deployment drill.” 

During the inspection, PHMSA requested records related to emergency response training at the 
West Seneca, New York field unit.  Kiantone provided the  Spill Prevention Training and Spill 
Response  Drills  (ERP  Records).  The  ERP  Records  indicated  that  the  West  Seneca  pipeline 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
manager  did  not  attend  the  emergency  response  training  drills  during  calendar  years  2020  and 
2021. 

Therefore, Kiantone failed to follow its OME and FRP regarding emergency response training, in 
accordance with § 195.402(a). 

3. 

§ 195.402 Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a) General. Each operator shall prepare and follow for each 
pipeline system a manual of written procedures for conducting 
normal operations and maintenance activities and handling abnormal 
operations and emergencies. This manual shall be reviewed at 
intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar 
year, and appropriate changes made as necessary to insure that the 
manual is effective. This manual shall be prepared before initial 
operations of a pipeline system commence, and appropriate parts 
shall be kept at locations where operations and maintenance activities 
are conducted. 

Kiantone failed to follow its written procedures.  Specifically, Kiantone failed to follow its Annual 
Cathodic  Protection  and  New  Cathodic  Protection  Systems  Survey,  dated  05/28/02  (BOT  CP) 
Section II regarding conducting its breakout tank cathodic protection surveys in accordance with 
§ 195.402(a). 

Section II of the BOT CP stated, among other requirements, that Kiantone shall “Obtain and record 
tank product level… Check and record rectifier operation… Report on all findings.  Compile a 
report stating the results of the survey and list any deficiencies found…”  The BOT CP procedure 
did not specify what form is to be utilized to record the required survey information or to report 
its findings, including any deficiencies found. 

During  the  inspection,  PHMSA requested  cathodic  protection records  for  the  breakout  tanks  at 
West Seneca, New York (Tanks 701, 702, 703, 704) and at Warren, Pennsylvania (Tanks 650, 
651, 652) for calendar years 2019 through 2021.  Kiantone provided the Tanks Potentials (BOT 
CP Records) documents.  The BOT CP Records, however, failed to record pertinent information 
as required by the BOT CP procedure such as the name of the tank, the facility/operator location, 
the tank product level, who conducted and signed off on the inspection, as well as a report on any 
findings.  The forms used to document these surveys varied by location and each lacked certain 
data  fields  for  capturing  information  discussed  by  the  procedure.  When  PHMSA  requested 
additional information on where this data was located, Kiantone stated it was included on the BOT 
CP  Records.  Kiantone  was  unable  to  demonstrate  that  it  had  performed  and  documented  the 
actions required by its BOT CP procedure. 

Therefore, Kiantone failed to follow its procedures regarding conducting its breakout tank cathodic 
protection surveys in accordance with § 195.402(a). 

4. 

§ 195.402 Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) General. Each operator shall prepare and follow for each 
pipeline system a manual of written procedures for conducting 
normal operations and maintenance activities and handling abnormal 
operations and emergencies. This manual shall be reviewed at 
intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar 
year, and appropriate changes made as necessary to insure that the 
manual is effective. This manual shall be prepared before initial 
operations of a pipeline system commence, and appropriate parts 
shall be kept at locations where operations and maintenance activities 
are conducted. 

Kiantone  failed  to  conduct  a  review  of  its  operations,  maintenance,  and  emergency  manual,  at 
intervals  not  exceeding  15  months,  but  at  least  once  each  calendar  year,  and  make  appropriate 
changes as necessary to insure that the manual is effective, in accordance with § 195.402(a). 

During  the  inspection,  PHMSA  requested  the  annual  review  records  for  the  operations, 
maintenance, and emergency manual for calendar years 2019 through 2021.  Kiantone provided 
its Operations, Maintenance & Emergency Response Procedures Manual, dated 03/07/22 (OME) 
– Appendix G. 

Kiantone stated that Appendix G contained the revision logs for its OME.  However, the revision 
logs failed to indicate that an annual review was conducted, who conducted the annual review, the 
dates of the annual review, who signed off/approved the annual review and why changes were 
made.  When the PHMSA inspector requested further information, Kiantone stated that each date 
documents a change that was made to the manuals. 

Therefore,  Kiantone  failed  to  conduct  an  annual  review  of  its  operations,  maintenance,  and 
emergency  manuals  during  calendar  years  2019  through  2021  at  intervals  not  exceeding  15 
months, but at least once each calendar year, in accordance with § 195.402(a). 

5. 

§ 195.403 Emergency response training. 

(a) … 
(c)  Each  operator  shall  require  and  verify  that  its  supervisors 
maintain  a  thorough  knowledge  of  that  portion  of  the  emergency 
response  procedures  established  under  195.402  for  which  they  are 
responsible to ensure compliance. 

Kiantone failed to require and verify that its supervisors maintain a thorough knowledge of that 
portion  of  the  emergency  response  procedures  established  under  §  195.402  for  which  they  are 
responsible  for  ensuring  compliance. 
Specifically,  Kiantone  failed  to  provide  records 
demonstrating compliance with § 195.403(c). 

During the inspection PHMSA requested records related to § 195.403(c) for calendar years 2019 
through 2021.  Kiantone was unable to produce any records related to its supervisors reviewing 
the  emergency  response  procedures  or  otherwise  verifying  its  supervisors’  knowledge  of  the 
emergency response procedures for which they are responsible to ensure compliance. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Therefore, Kiantone failed to require and verify that its supervisors maintain a thorough knowledge 
of that portion of the emergency response procedures established under § 195.402 for which they 
are responsible for ensuring compliance during calendar years 2019 through 2021 in accordance 
with § 195.403(c). 

6. 

§ 195.406 Maximum operating pressure. 

(a)  Except  for  surge  pressures  and  other  variations  from  normal 
operations,  no  operator  may  operate  a  pipeline  at  a  pressure  that 
exceeds any of the following: 

(1)  The  internal  design  pressure  of  the  pipe  determined  in 
accordance with § 195.106. However, for steel pipe in pipelines being 
converted under § 195.5, if one or more factors of the design formula 
(§ 195.106) are unknown, one of the following pressures is to be used as 
design pressure 

(i) Eighty percent of the first test pressure that produces yield under 
section  N5.0  of  appendix  N  of  ASME/ANSI  B31.8  (incorporated  by 
reference, see § 195.3), reduced by the appropriate factors in §§ 195.106 
(a) and (e); or 

(ii) If the pipe is 123⁄4 inch (324 mm) or less outside diameter and is 

not tested to yield under this paragraph, 200 p.s.i. (1379 kPa) gage. 
(2) The design pressure of any other component of the pipeline. 
(3) Eighty percent of the test pressure for any part of the pipeline 

which has been pressure tested under subpart E of this part. 

(4) Eighty percent of the factory test pressure or of the prototype 
test  pressure  for  any  individually  installed  component  which  is 
excepted from testing under § 195.305. 

(5) For pipelines under §§ 195.302(b)(1) and (b)(2)(i) that have not 
been pressure tested under subpart E of this part, 80 percent of the test 
pressure  or  highest  operating  pressure  to  which  the  pipeline  was 
subjected for 4 or more continuous hours that can be demonstrated by 
recording charts or logs made at the time the test or operations were 
conducted. 

Kiantone  failed  to  maintain  adequate  records  that  demonstrate  that  the  maximum  operating 
pressure  (MOP)  of  its  jurisdictional  pipeline  segments  were  determined  in  accordance  with  § 
195.406(a).  Specifically, Kiantone failed to maintain adequate records demonstrating the design 
pressure of all pipeline components pursuant to § 195.406(a)(2) to support its MOP determination 
for its West Seneca - Warren and Enbridge - West Seneca pipelines. 

During  the  inspection,  PHMSA  requested  records  supporting  the  design  pressure  of  the 
components of the Kiantone pipelines.  Kiantone provided the Calculation of Maximum Operating 
Pressure  Record,  dated  05/17/22  (MOP  Calculation)  and  the  Kiantone  Pipeline  Corporation 
Purchase  Order,  dated  03/12/71  (Valve  Purchase  Order).  Kiantone  did  not  provide  compliant 
documentation  related  to  the  design  pressures  of  the  valves  in  the  pipeline  system.  The  MOP 
Calculation did not demonstrate compliance to § 195.406(a)(2) as it failed to be supported and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
verified by traceable and verifiable records. 

The Valve Purchase Order was a purchase order for valves from 1971.  This Valve Purchase Order 
was insufficient to verify the design pressures of all valves  on Kiantone’s pipeline and did not 
verify an installation or design pressure of the current valves in the pipeline system.  Kiantone was 
unable to provide any complementary records to verify the Valve Purchase Order ratings as those 
of the valves in the system presently, and the ratings ultimately used in its MOP Calculation. 

Therefore, Kiantone failed to maintain adequate records to support its MOP determination of the 
West Seneca - Warren and Enbridge - West Seneca pipelines pursuant to § 195.406(a)(2). 

7. 

§ 195.410 Line markers. 

(a)  Except  as  provided  in  paragraph  (b)  of  this  section,  each 
operator  shall  place  and  maintain  line  markers  over  each  buried 
pipeline in accordance with the following: 

(1) Markers must be located at each public road crossing, at each 
railroad crossing, and in sufficient number along the remainder of each 
buried line so that its location is accurately known. 

Kiantone  failed  to  maintain  line  markers  at  each  public  road  crossing  so  that  its  location  is 
accurately known.  Specifically, Kiantone failed to maintain line markers at a public road crossing 
in  the  north  and  south  directions  adjacent  to  mainline  valve  eight,  in  north  Warren  County, 
Pennsylvania, in accordance with § 195.410(a). 

During the inspection, PHMSA made observations of missing line markers in the north and south 
directions near mainline valve eight and requested from Kiantone why there were missing line 
markers.  Kiantone stated that the line markers were knocked down due to third-party construction 
and logging activities and were not replaced. 

Therefore, Kiantone failed to maintain line markers in the north and south directions adjacent to 
mainline valve eight, in north Warren County, Pennsylvania, in accordance with § 195.410(a). 

8. 

§ 195.402 Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a) General. Each operator shall prepare and follow for each 

pipeline system a manual of written procedures for conducting 
normal operations and maintenance activities and handling abnormal 
operations and emergencies. This manual shall be reviewed at 
intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar 
year, and appropriate changes made as necessary to insure that the 
manual is effective. This manual shall be prepared before initial 
operations of a pipeline system commence, and appropriate parts 
shall be kept at locations where operations and maintenance activities 
are conducted. 

Kiantone  failed  to  follow  its  written  procedures.  Specifically,  Kiantone  failed  to  follow  its 
Operations,  Maintenance  &  Emergency  Response  Procedures  Manual,  dated  03/07/22  (OME) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
regarding  calibration  of  field  instrumentation  used  in  leak  detection,  in  accordance  with  § 
195.402(a). 

Kiantone’s OME, Section 6.4 Kiantone SCADA & CPM Systems, stated in part that “To ensure 
compliance with API 1130 Computational Pipeline Monitoring (CPM), as required by 49 CFR 
195.444, the Kiantone Pipeline Manager:  Ensures that transmitters providing input to the CPM 
system are calibrated according to manufacturer’s recommendations.” Section 195.444 requires, 
in part, that each CPM must comply with API RP 1130 (3rd Ed. 2007)  “in operating, maintaining, 
testing,  record  keeping,  and  dispatcher  training  of  the  system.”  AP  RP  1130  addresses  the 
“calibration and maintenance of the field instrumentation and the measurement that is necessary 
to adequately support a CPM system”, including that an operator’s calibration procedures should 
.  the  date,  time,  person’s  initials,  and  the  events  performed  during  the  test. 
address  “.  .
Instrumentation  and  measurement  should  be  calibrated  in  accordance  with  manufacturer’s 
recommendations  and  calibrations  should  be  traceable  to  National  Institute  for  Standards  and 
Testing.  Operating experience should provide the basis for determining an appropriate test and re-
calibration fixed interval.” 

During the inspection, PHMSA requested records regarding leak detection calibration equipment 
for Kiantone’s West Seneca – Warren and Enbridge – West Seneca pipelines.  Kiantone provided 
the  Mass  Flowmeter  Calibration  Certificates,  dated  2002  (Flowmeter  Records).  Furthermore, 
Kiantone provided the Periodic Verification & Calibration of Micro Motion Coriolis Flow Meters, 
dated 06/20/13 (Calibration Procedure). 

The Calibration Procedure stated in part: 

Calibration Interval - For customers that have not otherwise established a company 
policy, and have no industry guidelines to follow, a 3‐year calibration interval is 
suggested ‐ however, when equipped with Smart Meter Verification, this interval 
may be extended indefinitely if tested regularly with a passing result ‐ at least once 
every 3 months is recommended. 

When the  PHMSA inspector  re-requested recent  calibration records, Kiantone  discussed  that  it 
only has the original calibration certificates and has not calibrated the equipment since. 

Therefore,  Kiantone  failed  to  follow  its  OME  regarding  calibration  of  field  instrumentation 
equipment used in leak detection, in accordance with § 195.402(a). 

9. 

§ 195.452 Pipeline integrity management in high consequence areas. 

(a) … 
(l)  What  records  must  an  operator  keep  to  demonstrate 

compliance? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1)  An operator  must maintain, for the  useful  life  of  the pipeline, 
records  that  demonstrate  compliance  with  the  requirements  of  this 
subpart.  At  a  minimum,  an  operator  must  maintain  the  following 
records for review during an inspection: 

Kiantone failed to maintain records that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of subpart 
F. Specifically, Kiantone failed to maintain documents of the evaluation of the capability of its 
leak detection required by § 195.452(i)(3). 

Section 195.452(i)(3) states: 

(3) Leak detection. An operator must have a means to detect leaks on its pipeline 
system. An operator must evaluate the capability of its leak detection means and 
modify, as necessary, to protect the high consequence area. An operator's evaluation 
must, at least, consider, the following factors—length and size of the pipeline, type 
of product carried, the pipeline's proximity to the high consequence area, the 
swiftness of leak detection, location of nearest response personnel, leak history, and 
risk assessment results. 

Kiantone’s pipeline facilities include locations within high consequence areas (See, e.g., Kiantone 
Facility  Response  Plan,  dated  02/11/22).  During  the  inspection,  PHMSA  requested  records 
demonstrating compliance with the requirements of § 195.452(i)(3). Kiantone failed to produce 
any records for calendar years 2019 through 2021.  Subsequently, PHMSA requested records of 
any  leak  evaluations ever  performed  and  Kiantone  discussed  that they  do  not  have  a record  or 
evaluation on the leak detection system. 

Therefore,  Kiantone  failed  to  maintain  records  of  an  evaluation  of  the  capability  of  its  leak 
detection, in accordance with § 195.452(l)(1). 

Proposed Civil Penalty 

Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a related 
series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before January 6, 
2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the violation persists, 
up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or 
after May 3, 2021 and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not exceed $225,134 
per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for a related series of 
violations.  For  violation  occurring  on  or  after  January  11,  2021  and  before  May  3,  2021,  the 
maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a 
maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after July 
31,  2019  and  before  January  11,  2021,  the  maximum  penalty  may  not  exceed  $218,647  per 
violation  per  day the  violation  persists,  up to  a  maximum  of  $2,186,465  for  a  related  series  of 
violations.  For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before July 31, 2019, the 
maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to 
exceed $2,132,679.  For violation occurring on or after November 2, 2015 and before November 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per violation per day, with a maximum 
penalty not to exceed $2,090,022. 

We  have  reviewed  the  circumstances  and  supporting  documentation  involved  for  the  above 
probable violations and recommend that you be preliminarily assessed a civil penalty of $167,600 
as follows: 

Item number 
1 
5 
8 
9 

PENALTY 
$37,900 
$40,500 
$35,300 
$53,900 

Warning Items 

With respect to items 2, 4, 6 and 7 we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents 
involved in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action or penalty 
assessment proceedings at this time.  We advise you to promptly correct these items.  Failure to 
do so may result in additional enforcement action. 

Proposed Compliance Order 

With respect to items 3 and 9 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Kiantone Pipeline Corp.  Please 
refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this Notice. 

Response to this Notice 

Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators in 
Enforcement  Proceedings.  Please  refer  to  this  document  and  note  the  response  options.  All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available.  If you 
believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment under 5 
U.S.C. §552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second copy of 
the  document  with  the  portions  you  believe  qualify  for  confidential  treatment  redacted  and  an 
explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential treatment under 
5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a  waiver  of  your  right  to  contest  the  allegations  in  this  Notice  and  authorizes  the  Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  The Region Director 
may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted demonstrating good 
cause for an extension. 

In  your  correspondence  on  this  matter,  please  refer  to  CPF  1-2023-013-NOPV  and,  for  each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 

Robert Burrough 
Director, Eastern Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to Kiantone Pipeline Corp (Kiantone) a Compliance 
Order incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of Kiantone 
with the pipeline safety regulations: 

A. 

B. 

C. 

In regard to Item 3 of the Notice pertaining to breakout tank cathodic protection 
survey records, Kiantone must revise its procedure(s) and/or record form(s) to 
allow for consistent and complete capturing of information required for its 
breakout tank cathodic protection surveys.  Kiantone must submit revised 
procedure(s) and/or record form(s) to the Director – Eastern Region for review 
and approval within 60 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item 9 of the Notice pertaining to the failure to maintain records of an 
evaluation of the capability of its leak detection system, Kiantone must complete 
a leak detection evaluation on its associated pipeline system, in accordance with § 
195.452(i)(3) and forward all documentation to the Director – Eastern Region 
within 90 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

It is requested (not mandated) that Kiantone maintain documentation of the safety 
improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit 
the total to Robert Burrough, Director, Eastern Region, Pipeline and Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration.  It is requested that these costs be reported in 
two categories: 1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of plans, 
procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with replacements, 
additions and other changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
