NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
PROPOSED CIVIL PENALTY 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: stan.horton@bwpipelines.com; tina.baker@bwpipelines.com 

July 27, 2023 

Mr. Stanley Horton 
President/CEO 
Boardwalk Petrochemical Pipeline, LLC 
9 Greenway Plaza Suite 2800 
Houston, TX  77036 

Dear Mr. Horton: 

CPF 3-2023-014-NOPV 

From September 19 to September 23, 2022, a representative of the Pipeline and Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 
601 of 49 United States Code (U.S.C.) inspected, by video conference, your Control Room 
Management (CRM) records in Sulphur Springs, Louisiana. 

As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that you have committed probable violations of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The items inspected 
and the probable violations are: 

1. 

§ 195.444 Leak Detection 
(a) …. 
(b)  General. A pipeline must have an effective system for detecting leaks in 
accordance with §§ 195.134 or 195.452, as appropriate. An operator must 
evaluate the capability of its leak detection system to protect the public, 
property, and the environment and modify it as necessary to do so. At a 
minimum, an operator's evaluation must consider the following factors -
length and size of the pipeline, type of product carried, the swiftness of 
leak detection, location of nearest response personnel, and leak history. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Boardwalk’s CRM Procedure Appendix 8, Pipeline Leak Detection Procedure, did not include 
procedures for consideration of initial and periodic evaluation of the leak detect system 
capability, modifications identified through testing, evaluations and assessments, or records that 
demonstrated they had performed testing or evaluation to show they have an effective system for 
detecting leaks in accordance with § 195.444(b) and § 195.452(i)(3). Part 195.444(b) and Part 
195.452(i)(3) requires the operator to perform an evaluation that considers the following factors: 
length and size of the pipeline, type of product carried, the swiftness of leak detection, location 
of nearest response personnel, leak history, and risk assessment results.  There was nothing in the 
procedure that addressed these factors or pointed to a study that addressed these factors. The 
procedure did not require new evaluation and benchmarking if assets are added or removed, 
and the procedure did not establish a frequency for the leak detection capability evaluation. 

Boardwalk employs a combination of methods to accomplish effective leak detection, such as 
SCADA, leak surveys, patrols, and product accounting through measurement meters.  It did not 
require new evaluation and benchmarking if assets are added or removed, and the procedure did 
not establish a frequency for the leak detection capability evaluation. There were no records of 
testing the benchmark to verify it was established at an appropriate level to confidently detect 
leaks. There was no alarming around the benchmark provided in the SCADA mass balance 
system for monitoring. The procedure also did not require re-evaluation of the mass balance or 
rate of change when system parameters change. The operator did not provide records that 
demonstrated evaluations were completed to fulfill the requirements of § 195.444(b) and 
§ 195.452(i)(3). 

2. 

§ 195.446 Control room management. 

(a) …. 
(c) Provide adequate information.  Each operator must provide its controllers with 
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to 
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each 
of the following: 
(1) Implement API RP 1165 (incorporated by reference, see § 195.3) whenever a 
SCADA system is added, expanded or replaced, unless the operator demonstrates 
that certain provisions of API RP 1165 are not practical for the SCADA system 
used; 

Boardwalk failed to provide a record that demonstrated they had implemented and were 
compliant with API RP 1165 whenever a SCADA system is added, expanded or replaced.  
Simply stating in the CRM Procedure and Style Guide that they will comply was not adequate to 
demonstrate compliance that their  SCADA screens, system performance and HMI Style 
Guide/SCADA Design Standard met the requirements of API 1165.  Boardwalk did not provide 
records to demonstrate they had reviewed their screens and system functions to demonstrate they 
were compliant with API 1165. 

A review of the Boardwalk Pipelines Display Standards and Style Guide: Liquids Control 
Revision date 07/27/2022 identified that Sections 5 and 10 of API 1165 First Edition, January 
2007 were not included as required by § 195.446 (c)(1). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
3. 

§ 195.446 Control room management. 

(a) …. 
(c)  Provide adequate information.  Each operator must provide its controllers with 
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to 
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each 
of the following: 
(1) …. 
(2)  Conduct a point-to-point verification between SCADA displays and related field 
equipment when field equipment is added or moved and when other changes that 
affect pipeline safety are made to field equipment of SCADA displays; 

Boardwalk failed to conduct a point-to-point (P2P) when they implemented a new SCADA 
system at the Sulpher Springs Control Room. Additionally, procedure BWP-6603 did not include 
a requirement to verify all SCADA screens when conducting a point-to-point (P2P) to ensure 
values and alarm graphics/messaging was accurate on all screens.  As a result, Boardwalk could 
not produce records that demonstrated the point-to-point verification as well as which screens 
were reviewed and information verified as correct. 

Prior to start of the inspection, the operator implemented a new SCADA system in November 
2021 and conducted parallel polling between the new SCADA system (AVIVA) and old 
SCADA system (Honeywell) in place of point-to-point verification.  A review of the SCADA 
Migration Issue Log identified screen issues where some points required orange boxes around 
them to indicate control points. Other points had orange boxes around them but should not have 
had them. There were other points that were not reading the same values and the labeling was not 
correct (GPM for flow when it should have been KLBS/hr).  The Migration Issues Log was used 
as a different tool than the P2P screen verification which was not adequate to demonstrate 
compliance.  The process did identify screen deficiencies and required correction of them.  The 
Migration Issue Log, reviewed as a record during inspection, offered insight into SCADA screen 
design errors, and demonstrated the screens were not always developed correctly to meet the 
SCADA HMI Design Standards. 

4. 

195.446 Control room management. 
(a) …. 
(c)  Provide adequate information.  Each operator must provide its controllers with 
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to 
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each 
of the following: 
(1) …. 
(3)  Test and verify an internal communication plan to provide adequate means for 
manual operation of the pipeline safety, at least once each calendar year, but at 
intervals not to exceed 15 months; 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Boardwalk failed to complete a test of the internal communication system for safe manual 
operation of the pipeline in calendar year 2020 and could not provide records for the actual event 
they counted as a test on May 11, 2019. 

On May 11, 2019, there was a lightning strike which resulted in loss of communication.  Pipeline 
control was moved to the Port Allen backup control room.  The terminal was operating in 
manual mode and calling back information to the backup control center.  Boardwalk could not 
find any logbooks related to the readings that the terminal was reporting back to the control 
room.  An operator, pursuant to § 195.446(j)(1) must maintain for review during inspection 
records that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of Part 195.446. 

In October 2020, Boardwalk was preparing for shut down ahead of a hurricane.  They operated 
out of the Houston backup center.  They operated some parts of their system and shut down the 
rest during the storm. The operator used field personnel to shut in part of the affected system, but 
this was not considered part of their manual operations test plan.   This cannot be considered a 
test. 

5. 

§ 195.446 Control room management. 

(a) …. 
(e)  Alarm management.  Each operator using a SCADA system must have a written 
alarm management plan  to provide for effective controller response to alarms.  An 
operator’s plan must include provisions to: 

Boardwalk's CRM Plan was not adequate because it did not have a process to address 
rationalization of alarms to provide for effective controller response to alarms.  During the 
inspection, the operator indicated that alarms may have been rationalized, but they did not appear 
to have inherited any work papers from the previous operator. They also indicated that they rely 
heavily on the field to say what they want monitored and the response level.  This approach lacks 
consistency in alarm management. 

6. 

§ 195.446 Control room management. 

(a) …. 
(h)  Training.  Each operator must establish a controller training program and 
review the training program content to identify potential improvements at least 
once each calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months.  An operator’s 
program must provide for training each controller to carry out the roles and 
responsibilities defined by the operator. In addition the training program must 
include the following elements: 
(1)  Responding to abnormal operating conditions likely to occur simultaneously or 
in sequence; 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Boardwalk failed to provide training content of abnormal operations that could occur 
simultaneously or in sequence to support the training requirement.  Sections 9.1 and 9.9 of the 
CRM Plan required controllers to be trained on this topic.  However, the operator did not provide 
a list or examples of abnormal operating conditions that could occur simultaneously or in 
sequence that was used for training.  While there are generic conditions that can exist on every 
pipeline, the operator needed to review their operations to determine if there are unique 
conditions on their pipeline.  This information was missing from the training content used for 
training controllers.  The operator indicated that they use the procedures to cover this topic for 
controllers, but there was nothing in the procedures, training content or details of training records 
that adequately demonstrated compliance with this requirement. 

7. 

195.446 Control room management. 
(a) …. 
(h)  Training.  Each operator must establish a controller training program and 
review the training program content to identify potential improvements at least 
once each calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months.  An operator’s 
program must provide for training each controller to carry out the roles and 
responsibilities defined by the operator. In addition the training program must 
include the following elements: 
(1) …. 
(3)  Training controllers on their roles and responsibilities for communication under 
the operator’s emergency response procedures; 

Boardwalk did not establish specific training for how the leak detection system works and 
supports alarming to SCADA. The CRM Training program content referred the controller to 
Appendix 8, which provided some information about the calculated benchmark to identify 
potential leaks. Appendix 8 did not provide directions or steps for a controller to take, if a 
possible leak or leak is identified. No training records were presented for review during the 
inspection of controller training related to Leak Detection other than requiring the review of 
Appendix 8 – Leak Detection of the CRM Plan. 

Proposed Civil Penalty 
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a 
related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before 
January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the 
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after May 3, 2021 and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before 
May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation 
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before 
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a 
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679.  For violation occurring on or after November 2, 
2015 and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per 
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022. 

We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documentation involved for the above 
probable violations and recommend that you be preliminarily assessed a civil penalty of $16,700 
as follows: 

Item number 
4 

PENALTY 
$16,700 

Proposed Compliance Order 
With respect to Items 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, and 8, pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and 
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Boardwalk.  
Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this 
Notice. 

Response to this Notice 

Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators 
in Enforcement Proceedings.  Please refer to this document and note the response options.  All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available.  If 
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment 
under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second 
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted 
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential 
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  The Region 
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted 
demonstrating good cause for an extension. 

In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 3-2023-014-NOPV and, for each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 

Gregory A. Ochs 
Director, Central Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

cc: Tina Baker, Manager Compliance Service, tina.baker@bwpipelines.com 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to Boardwalk Petrochemical Pipeline, LLC
(Boardwalk) a Compliance Order incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure
the compliance of Boardwalk with the pipeline safety regulations: 

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

E. 

In regard to Item 1 of the Notice pertaining to Boardwalk not including 
procedures that demonstrated an effective system for detecting leaks in 
accordance with § 195.444 (b) and §195.452 (i)(3),  Boardwalk must develop 
procedures to include recommended frequency of testing as well as the format and 
criteria for testing, and evaluation of the results and response/action items to 
address findings.  Boardwalk must also conduct and document 
test/assessments/evaluations and present documentation to PHMSA within 90 
days of receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item 2 of the Notice pertaining to Boardwalk failing to demonstrate 
that it had implemented and were compliant with API RP 1165 whenever a 
SCADA system is added, expanded or replaced, Boardwalk must conduct an audit 
of their SCADA screens and style guide against API RP 1165 to identify 
compliance and deficiencies and correct those deficiencies, or demonstrate that 
certain provisions of API RP 1165 are not practical for the SCADA system used, 
within 90 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item 3 of the Notice pertaining to Boardwalk’s failure to conduct a 
point-to-point when implementing the new AVIVA SCADA system.  Boardwalk 
must complete a point to point of the AVIVA Sulphur Springs SCADA system. 
The procedure for point-to-point must also be modified to include verification of 
all screens, verify all point values and status match, the appropriate alarm 
conditions present such as on/off, open/closed, local/remote, in alarm with the 
correct priority, etc., within 120 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item 5 of the Notice pertaining to Boardwalk’s failure to have a 
process to address rationalization of alarms to provide for effective controller 
response to alarms, Boardwalk must develop an alarm rationalization process that 
supports a consistent method for determination of alarm priorities and set points 
to provide effective controller response to alarms.  The operator must also utilize 
that process to rationalize all alarms within  120 days of receipt of the Final 
Order. 

In regard to Item 6 of the Notice pertaining to Boardwalk failing to provide 
training content for abnormal operations that could occur simultaneously or in 
sequence to support the training requirement, Boardwalk must identify alarms that 
could occur simultaneously or in sequence, the response to those conditions  and 
training content to support those conditions.  The operator must also train 
controllers on the content.  The operator must also utilize that process to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rationalize all alarms within  60 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

F. 

G. 

In regard to Item 7 of the Notice pertaining to Boardwalk failing to establish 
specific training for how the leak detection system works and supports alarming 
to SCADA as well as what steps to take, as the controller, if a possible leak or 
leak is identified, Boardwalk must develop training content to describe how the 
Aviva system works to calculate the benchmark, how the value is alarmed to 
SCADA, and how the controller must respond should the alarm present. The 
operator must also train controllers on the content within 60 days of receipt of the 
Final Order. 

It  is requested that Boardwalk maintain documentation of the safety improvement 
costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit the total to 
Gregory Ochs, Director, Central Region, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration, OPS.  It is requested that these costs be reported in two 
categories: 1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of plans, procedures, 
studies and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with replacements, additions and 
other changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
