NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: cynthia.hansen@enbridge.com; 
Michael.koby@enbridge.com; leo.rosasjr@enbridge.com 

January 18, 2024 

Cynthia Hansen 
EVP & President Gas Transmission and Midstream 
ENBRIDGE INC. 
915 North Eldridge Parkway, Suite 1100 
Houston, TX 77079 

Dear Ms. Hansen: 

CPF 3-2024-007-NOPV 

From March 28 through September 23, 2022, representatives of the Pipeline and Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 
601 of 49 United States Code (U.S.C.), inspected the Enbridge_Gas_Spectra_East_Tenn 
inspection system (ETNG) which consists of two of Enbridge Inc.’s subsidiaries, namely, East 
Tennessee Natural Gas, LLC and Saltville Gas Storage Company, LLC, across Alabama, 
Georgia, North Carolina, Tennessee, and Virginia. 

As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that ETNG has committed probable violations of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The items inspected 
and the probable violations are: 

1. 

§ 192.479 Atmospheric corrosion control: General. 

(a)  Each  operator  must  clean  and  coat  each  pipeline  or  portion  of  pipeline  that  is 
exposed to the atmosphere, except pipelines under paragraph (c) of this section. 

ETNG failed to provide protection against atmospheric corrosion by cleaning and coating 
each pipeline or portion of pipeline that is exposed to the atmosphere. Specifically, 
during the field inspection of Unit 6582, at or near milepost 30.9, the PHMSA inspectors 
observed bare exposed pipe in a creek bed. While ENTG’s latest atmospheric inspection, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
completed on September 29, 2021, identified this site as needing repair, ENTG did not 
initiate a project to repair this exposure. PHMSA’s field observation, which was 
documented with photographic evidence, shows that ETNG failed to provide protection 
against atmospheric corrosion on its pipeline by cleaning and coating each portion of 
pipeline that is exposed to the atmosphere, in violation of § 192.479(a). 

2. 

§ 192.705 Transmission lines: Patrolling. 

(a) Each operator shall have a patrol program to observe surface conditions on and 
adjacent to the transmission line right-of-way for indications of leaks, construction 
activity, and other factors affecting safety and operation. 

ETNG failed to maintain the right-of-way (ROW) at an appropriate level for the type of 
patrols that were being done. Specifically, ETNG solely conducted aerial patrols of its 
ROWs. During PHMSA’s ROW inspections, inspectors observed 12 overgrown areas, 
with some areas having tree growth canopied over the pipeline. 

Patrolling of ROWs is essential to help identify potential problems from third-party 
activities along the pipeline and observing for indications of leaks. The surface conditions 
of the ROW and adjacent areas cannot be adequately inspected by aerial patrolling when 
those areas are obstructed by an overhanging tree canopy. No other methods of patrolling 
were conducted in these locations at the time of the field inspection. Therefore, by failing 
to adequately maintain its ROWs, ETNG failed to follow § 192.705(a). 

3. 

§ 192.750 Launcher and receiver safety. 

Any  launcher  or  receiver  used  after  July  1,  2021,  must  be  equipped  with  a  device 
capable of safely relieving pressure in the barrel before removal or opening of the 
launcher  or  receiver  barrel  closure  or  flange  and  insertion  or  removal  of  in-line 
inspection  tools,  scrapers,  or  spheres.  An  operator  must  use  a  device  to  either: 
Indicate  that  pressure  has  been  relieved  in  the  barrel;  or  alternatively  prevent 
opening of the barrel closure or flange when pressurized, or insertion or removal of 
in-line devices (e.g. inspection tools, scrapers, or spheres), if pressure has not been 
relieved. 

ETNG failed to maintain the pig trap safety devices in working order. Specifically, 
during field inspections, PHMSA inspectors noted at seven locations safety chain/cable 
deficiencies. The safety chain/cable is used to prevent the pig trap’s door from being 
opened without first removing a plug to ensure that pressure has been relieved within the 
pig trap. These safety chain/cable deficiencies would allow the pig trap door to be opened 
without first removing the plug, posing safety concerns. 

Following PHMSA’s inspection, ETNG has completed repairs to the safety chain/cable at 
each location. By failing to maintain the safety chain/cable at seven locations, ETNG 
failed to follow § 192.750. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Proposed Civil Penalty 

Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a 
related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before 
January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the 
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations. For violation 
occurring on or after May 3, 2021 and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for 
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before 
May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation 
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations. For violation 
occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for 
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before 
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a 
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679. For violation occurring on or after November 2, 
2015 and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per 
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022. 

We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved in this case, and have 
decided not to propose a civil penalty assessment at this time. 

Proposed Compliance Order 

With respect to Items 1, 2 and 3, pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to East Tennessee Natural 
Gas, LLC. Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of 
this Notice. 

Response to this Notice 

Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators 
in Enforcement Proceedings. Please refer to this document and note the response options. All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available. If 
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment 
under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second 
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted 
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential 
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options. If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order. If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice. The Region 
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted 
demonstrating good cause for an extension. 

In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 3-2024-007-NOPV and, for each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

Sincerely, 

Gregory A. Ochs 
Director, Central Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

cc:  Michael Koby – Michael.koby@enbridge.com 

Leo Rosas Jr. – leo.rosasjr@enbridge.com 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to East Tennessee Natural Gas, LLC (ETNG) a 
Compliance Order incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance
of ETNG with the pipeline safety regulations: 

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

E. 

In regard to Item 1 of the Notice pertaining to protection against atmospheric 
corrosion, ETNG must submit a schedule for repair of the relevant pipe section 
within 90 days of receipt of the Final Order. ETNG must also submit evidence of 
the completed repair within 30 days after it is complete. 

In regard to Item 2 of the Notice pertaining to maintaining the ROW, ETNG must 
submit a schedule for clearing the locations noted in the violation report or 
perform alternative ROW inspection methods within 90 days of receipt of the 
Final Order. ETNG must also submit evidence of the completed clearing within 
30 days after it is done or its plan to continue ROW inspections with an 
acceptable inspection method in these locations. 

In regard to Item 3 of the Notice pertaining to pig trap safety devices, ETNG must 
train its staff to ensure these safety devices are maintained within 90 days of 
receipt of the Final Order. ETNG must also submit documentation of the 
completed training within 120 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

Should any of the above Proposed Compliance Order items extend beyond 90 
days to complete, ETNG must submit on the 91st day a report on all outstanding 
work necessary to implement the Compliance Order. Follow-up reports must be 
submitted every 90 days thereafter until all work necessary to implement the 
Compliance Order items is completed and the Final Order closed. Such reports 
shall be submitted to Gregory A. Ochs, Director, OPS Central Region, Pipeline 
and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration. 

It is requested that ETNG maintain documentation of the safety improvement 
costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit the total to 
Gregory A. Ochs, Director, OPS Central Region, Pipeline and Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration. It is requested that these costs be reported in two 
categories: 1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of plans, procedures, 
studies and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with replacements, additions and 
other changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
