NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
PROPOSED CIVIL PENALTY 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: aaron.milford@magellanlp.com, 
mark.materna@magellanlp.com 

September 8, 2023 

Mr. Aaron Milford 
President/CEO 
Magellan Pipeline, LLC 
One Williams Center 
PO Box 22186 
Tulsa, OK  74172 

Dear:  Mr. Milford 

CPF 3-2023-026-NOPV 

From June 27 to August 25, 2022, a representative of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 
United States Code (U.S.C.), inspected the Magellan Pipeline, LLC's (Magellan) Control Room 
Management (CRM) procedures and records in Tulsa, Oklahoma, by video conference. 

As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that Magellan has committed probable violations of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).  The items inspected 
and the probable violations are: 

1. 

195.446 Control Room Management 

(a)…. 
(c)  Provide adequate information.  Each operator must provide its controllers with 
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to 
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each 
of the following: 
(1)…. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
     
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(2)  Conduct a point-to-point verification between SCADA displays and related field 
equipment when field equipment is added or moved and when other changes that 
affect pipeline safety are made to field equipment. 

Magellan’s  point-to-point  records  were  not  adequate  to  demonstrate  thoroughness  of  the 
verification  process  between  SCADA  displays  and  related  field  equipment.  A  review  was 
completed of point-to-point records for the Bethany FHR to Kansas City project and the Razorback 
Pipeline project. During this review it was identified that alarm setpoint values were not actually 
available in the documentation to support verification of the alarms presenting at the right set point, 
with the correct priority, color and alarm description in the alarm log as well as appropriately on 
subsequent SCADA screens. 

There was no indication of the test having been completed live or simulated.  Screen verification 
was  documented by a check mark,  but there were no actual records showing which screens had 
been checked. Procedure 9.02-ADM-082 Revision:6 12/15/21, Sections 2.5 and 6.0, required the 
SCADA  analyst  to  document  simulated  points.  Section  5.7,  Display  Changes,  had  a  note  that 
stated, “[T]his verification may only be used when an existing point is moved on a display or added 
to a different display.  New or rescaled points must be verified to the field device.”  Section 5.7.6 
required recording the name of the affected displays and final SCADA value or state, but not for 
new  screens/displays.  There  was  no  other  requirement  to  verify  new  screens  or  document  the 
screens reviewed and verified. 

2. 

195.446 Control room management. 
(a)…. 
(c) Provide adequate information. Each operator must provide its controllers with 
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to 
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each 
of the following: 
(1)…. 
(3) Test and verify an internal communication plan to provide adequate means for 
manual operation of the pipeline safely, at least once each calendar year, but at 
intervals not to exceed 15 months; 

Magellan’s test of the internal communication plan for safe manual operation was not adequate 
to demonstrate compliance. This was primarily the result of the inadequacy of procedure 9.02-
ADM-028 REV 14 6/22/2022. While the procedure was very well thought out and thorough in 
what should be considered in a shut down, the procedure did provide direction and tools for the 
controllers to function/operate manually over a longer term outage and direction and tools for the 
control room to operate all systems collectively. 

Test records were reviewed for 2019, 2020 and 2021.  The form used for testing,  Manual 
Operation Notification and Drill Checklist 09-FORM-1119, was designed for manual shutdown 
of a pipeline segment and documenting specific information communicated from the field for a 
short-term test.  The form was not adequate to capture the requirements defined in Magellan’s 
procedure for manual operation, 9.02-ADM-028 REV 14 6/22/2022, which can occur over a 
longer duration. The form, used for testing and manual operations, was missing critical 
information relevant to an entire SCADA outage.  Missing from the form were tank levels 
(where appropriate), abnormal operations, emergencies, and leak detection. Such information can 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be reported by field personnel during their required manual operations checks reported to the 
control room .  Additionally, the same pipeline system on the same console was tested in 2019 
and 2020, while  a different console was tested in 2021.  A test of one console, each year, in a 
control room with multiple consoles is not adequate to evaluate the operator’s manual operation 
plan in the event of loss of SCADA because controllers need to be given experience in operating 
under the process in the event a catastrophic SCADA failure occurs. 

Step 2.4 of the procedure directed Field Employees, as directed by Operations Control, to 
communicate with impacted customers or third parties, initiate manual shut down of all pumps, 
close valves, including tank valves and mainline valves, and report status to the controllers.  The 
procedure did not provide a tool that identified those key customers, third parties, pumps and 
valves. The field is required to document manual shut down activity on the Daily Operations Log 
which is a separate document from the control room eLogger and Controller Hand Over. In 
follow up communications, Magellan indicated that, “[t]he controllers document what operations 
are running and will utilize this information to coordinate the pipeline shutdowns, if SCADA is 
unavailable.” This information was not available in the procedure.  The process was unclear as to 
who is accountable to ensure all critical facilities, from across all 11 consoles, have been placed 
in the correct state (on/off, open/closed, shutdown) designated by the operator for manual 
shutdown and isolation. The controllers at the consoles worked as independent units accountable 
for the systems assigned to that console.  Without a control room overview process the operator 
could not verify when manual shutdown was complete for the control room.  They did not have 
anything for monitoring the lines and relied on eLogger to manage the system and monitor after 
shutdown. 

Magellan had a testing process and form to document the test, but this is not the same process or 
form utilized for an actual event.  The test should simulate the actual process that would be used 
in the event all of SCADA or a portion of the SCADA system is lost and not available to the 
controller.a 

3. 

195.446 Control room management. 

(a)…. 

(c) Provide adequate information.  Each operator must provide its controllers with 
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to 
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each 
of the following: 
(1)…. 
(5) Implement section 5 of API RP 1168 (incorporated by reference, see §195.3) to 
establish procedures for when a different controller assumes responsibility 
including the content of information to be exchanged. 

a  As part of Magellan’s continuous improvement process, the 09-FORM-1119 Manual Operation Notification and Drill Checklist 
was enhanced in December of 2022 by moving it to a Manual Shutdown and Monitoring tab on the Controller Hand Over of 
Responsibility and E-Log Form. This form is in excel format, which will allow the controller to add lines to the spreadsheet in the 
event of a true manual shutdown. It also creates a consistent place for information to be captured in either a drill setting or a true 
event. Additionally, the requirement to document the controller and impact to 3rd party or a customer has been added to the form. 
While this was a good improvement, it is not adequate to demonstrate compliance. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Magellan failed to implement section 5 of API RP 1168, Section 5.3.1, by not including a review 
of abnormal operations and emergencies during shift change.  The shift change forms and 
Logmate notes for March 22, 2021, and April 12 & 13, 2021, were reviewed during inspection.  
The forms did not include a section to document abnormal operations (AO) or emergencies, third 
party incidents, or incident/safety events.  The  forms did require documentation of operations 
and maintenance items and a review of alarms, all relevant to API 1168 section 5.  The forms 
also required a review of Logmate note entries, which document all alarms received. Alarms may 
be notification of an AO, but not all alarms relate to an AO. The operator indicated in procedure 
9.02-ADM-022 Revision 23 11/02/2021 that AOs, emergencies, and safety events may be 
documented in the “Special Notes” section.  However, there was no process to review ongoing 
AOs that cross over multiple shifts. 

Magellan’s procedure 9.02-ADM-022 Revision 23 11/02/2021 was not adequate because it did 
not meet the requirements of API 1168, Section 5. This section of the standard addressed what 
needed to be communicated during shift change, specifically included are emergencies and 
abnormal operating conditions (AOC) during shift change.  Magellan’s procedure lumped AOs 
and emergencies, safety events, and reportable events in to the “Special Notes” section of the 
shift change form along with items not required by API 1168. It did include operations, tank 
status, maintenance, alarm reviews, and ELog entries. It did not include third party incidents or 
changes to assets.  Procedure 9.02-ADM-003 Revision: 20  07/14/21, section 2.1.6, required the 
controller to “Complete appropriate documentation for the Abnormal Operation as applicable.”  
The procedure did not define what is appropriate documentation. It is possible this related to the 
alarm response guide instructions, but it was not referenced as such. 

The form had semi-instructions as prompts for controllers to complete a shift turnover.  The 
procedure had required items to complete/include during shift turnover.  The form and 
procedure, while connected, did not support each other and did not demonstrate implementation 
of API 1168, section 5. 

The procedure 9.02-ADM-022 needs to be amended to include a review of AOCs and 
emergencies, whether that is through Logmate, creating a listing in the shift change form, or 
other means.  Procedure 9.02-ADM-003 needs to be amended to better define “appropriate 
documentation for the Abnormal Operation…”.  The alarm response guide needs to be reviewed 
and amended to provide a consistent approach for AOCs to direct controllers to document in 
Logmate.09-Form-1107 needs to be amended to include instruction for reviewing /adding AOCs 
and emergencies. 

4. 

195.446 Control room management. 

(a)…. 
(e)  Alarm management.  Each operator using a SCADA system must have a written 
alarm management plan to provide for effective controller response to alarms.  An 
operator’s plan must include: 
(1)…. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
(4)  Review the alarm management plan required by this paragraph at least once 
each calendar year, but at intervals not exceeding 15 months, to determine the 
effectiveness of the plan 

Magellan’s records for the annual review of the Alarm Management Plan to determine 
effectiveness was not adequate to demonstrate compliance.  The operator provided CMS tasks 
allegedly demonstrating compliance dated 12/31/2019, 12/31/2020 and 12/31/2021. However, 
the documentation provided  did not  show what was considered and included in the review of 
the Alarm Management Plan to determine its effectiveness.  The records provided did not show 
the review’s findings or follow-up actions, if any, to improve the effectiveness of the plan. 

The operator indicated they use the monthly review Key Performance Indicators (KPI) as their 
primary action to determine effectiveness of the plan.  However, there was no summary or 
collective assessment representing  an annual review. 

5. 

195.446 Control room management. 

(a)…. 
(h)  Training.  Each operator must establish a controller training program and 
review the training program content to identify potential improvements at least 
once each calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months.  An operator’s 
program must provide for training each controller to carry out the roles and 
responsibilities defined by the operator.  In addition the training program must 
include the following elements: 

Magellan’s training content review results and modifications failed to demonstrate an adequate 
review of the training program content to identify potential improvements at least once each 
calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months.  As an example of modifications made to 
the training content, Magellan recommended  NCCER (National Center for Construction 
Education and Research) booklets be eliminated as a training content. However, Magellan had 
no records documenting how that decision was reached. Additionally, Magellan recommended 
an (Authorization for Expenditure) AFE to expand the simulator capabilities.  However, there 
were no records to show how Magellan came to that solution. Magellan provided a form, Annual 
Operations Control Site Specific Training Review 09-FORM-1122, that was a checklist and 
identified content improvements. It was obvious from reviewing the records that reviews, and 
modifications were being made to the training content, and results were being recorded, but there 
were no documents that indicated what was reviewed or the findings/results of the review that 
led to the modifications.  Documentation to demonstrate compliance must include what was 
reviewed to identify potential improvements, who performed the review, the findings of the 
review, and actions taken to modify the content for improvement for training each controller to 
carry out the roles and responsibilities defined by the operator. 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6. 

195.446 Control room management. 

(a)…. 
(h)  Training.  Each operator must establish a controller training program and 
review the training program content to identify potential improvements at least 
once each calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months.  An operator’s 
program must provide for training each controller to carry out the roles and 
responsibilities defined by the operator.  In addition the training program must 
include the following elements: 
(1)…. 
(6)  Control room team training and exercises that include both controllers and 
other individuals, defined by the operator, who would reasonably be expected to 
operationally collaborate with controllers (control room personnel) during normal, 
abnormal or emergency situations.  Operators must comply with the team training 
requirements under this paragraph no later than January 23, 2018. 

Magellan failed to demonstrate compliance with §195.446(h)(6) because they did not include in 
their procedures team training and exercises that included both controllers and other individuals, 
defined by the operator, who would reasonably be expected to operationally collaborate with 
controllers (control room personnel) during normal, abnormal or emergency situations.  This was 
indicative of inadequate procedures SIP 9.02-ADM-029 Revision 11 07/14/2021 CRM Plan, 
section 3.8, and procedure SIP 9.02-ADM-083 Revision 11 11/01/2021, specifically section 
3.5.6.  These procedures did not require for the three operational modes (normal, abnormal, 
emergency) inclusion of any type of soft skills training. 

Team trainings and exercises are required to include both controllers and those who would be 
expected to collaborate with controllers.  Also required in the training is all modes of operation 
(normal, abnormal and emergency) and how an individual’s behaviors and communication styles 
can change as the modes shift. Therefore, some inclusion of soft skills or team building type 
exercises is important to the Team Training effort. 

Magellan employed primarily Computer Based Training (CBT) for Team Training. While CBT 
can be a reasonable option for some level of team training, it cannot be the sole source.  The 
regulation requires "Control Room Team Training and exercises that include both controllers and 
other individuals defined by the operator.”   The FAQ provided further guidance that “at least 
one controller be present in Team Training sessions."  A CBT is not adequate to demonstrate 
compliance because a CBT is individual training. 

Additionally, the procedure also included a variety of emergency type response drills that 
controllers may be included in as participants. SIP 9.02-ADM-083, section 3.4.7, required the 
controllers complete a minimum of 1 drill/test or Code Red test each year.  However, these drills 
typically focus on an emergency and not an emerging event, which is the expectation for Team 
Training exercises and training.  There should be an attempt to rotate all controllers and "others" 
through the Team Training sessions and continue to supplement with CBTs as appropriate. 

Magellan’s procedure SIP 2.01-ADM 001 Training Matrix  (Magellan Wide) under Element 2 
identified job roles required to complete team training every 24 months. Those job titles or 
groups included field, ops mangers, ops supervisors, scheduling, and controllers.  While the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
procedure described who must attend and what topics may be covered and how often training is 
to occur for controllers and others, it falls short of defining who is responsible for developing 
and conducting team training and how to engage the "others" with controllers. The responsibility 
to “[e]nsure completion of control room team training,” was assigned to the Supervisor of 
Operations Control Applications in section 3.5.  This means the Supervisor needs to make sure 
the controller has completed the required training.  The operator was using various drills, 
tabletops, public outreach drills OPA/FRP, CBTs and crediting those as team training.  While 
elements of these drills and events have similarities of what can be covered in team training, they 
are not a substitute for a well thought out and engaging team training session. 

7. 

195.446 Control room management. 

(a)…. 
(j) Compliance and deviations.  An operator must maintain for review during 
inspection: 
(1)  Records that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section; 

Magellan did not provide records adequate to demonstrate compliance for verification of correct 
safety related alarm set points and alarm descriptors when associated field instruments are 
calibrated or changed and at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 
months.  The operator provided records from their CMS database identifying this task 
completion for 2019, 2020 and 2021.  These records did not show what alarms were reviewed, or 
which notations of identified deficiencies and corrections were completed, as required by the 
SCADA and Operations Control Supervisor in SIP 9.02-ADM-084 Revision 5 01/01/2021, 
section 2.2 and 2.3.  A task record from CMS database, alone, is not adequate to demonstrate 
compliance. 

Proposed Civil Penalty 

Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a 
related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before 
January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the 
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after May 3, 2021 and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before 
May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation 
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before 
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a 
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679.  For violation occurring on or after November 2, 
2015 and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per 
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documentation involved for the above 
probable violations and recommend that you be preliminarily assessed a civil penalty of $ 39,100 
as follows: 

Item number 
6 

PENALTY 
$ 39,100 

Proposed Compliance Order 

With respect to items 1,2,3, and 6, pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Magellan Pipeline, 
LLC.  Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this 
Notice. 

Warning Items 

With respect to items 4, 5, and 7, we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents 
involved in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action or penalty 
assessment proceedings at this time.  We advise you to promptly correct these items.  Failure to 
do so may result in additional enforcement action. 

Response to this Notice 

This Notice is issued in accordance with 49 C.F.R. § 190.207(c).  Any response you may have 
submitted to the original Notice is no longer applicable.  You must respond as set forth below. 

Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators 
in Enforcement Proceedings.  Please refer to this document and note the response options.  All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available.  If 
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment 
under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second 
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted 
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential 
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  The Region 
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted 
demonstrating good cause for an extension. 

In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF  3-2023-026-NOPV and, for each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 

Gregory A. Ochs 
Director, Central Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

cc:  Mark Materna, Director Pipeline Integrity (mark.materna@magellanlp.com) 

Enclosures:  Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to Magellan Pipeline, LLC, a Compliance Order 
incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of Magellan
Pipeline, LLC with the pipeline safety regulations: 

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

In regard to Item 1 of the Notice pertaining to Magellan’s point-to-point (P2P) 
records being inadequate to provide thoroughness in the verification process 
between SCADA displays and related field equipment, Magellan must amend 
their procedures and forms to include verification and documentation of alarm set 
points, documentation of the screens verified, and whether the point was tested 
live or by simulation.  These procedures and forms must be utilized to perform a 
P2P for the Bethany FHR to Kansas City project and the Razorback Pipeline 
project within 120 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item 2 of the Notice pertaining to Magellan’s test of the internal 
communication plan for safe manual operation not being adequate,  Magellan 
must amend its procedure to include a detailed procedure and a test plan for the 
shutdown (manual shutdown) of the system, both in total and by console. If the 
operator wishes to continue to manually move product through the system, a 
procedure, forms, and test plan must be developed for that as well.   The test plan 
must be representative of the plan and demonstrate a thorough test and 
documentation of the effort.  Using the amended plan, the operator must complete 
a test and provide documentation to PHMSA within 90 days of receipt of the 
Final Order. 

In regard to Item 3 of the Notice pertaining to Magellan failing to implement 
Section 5 of API RP 1168 by not including a review of abnormal operations and 
emergencies during shift change, Magellan must modify its procedures to include 
documentation and communication of abnormal operations and emergencies 
during shift change. Controllers must be trained on the new procedures.  Evidence 
of the amended procedure, forms, to include modification of the shift change 
form, and training must be provided to PHMSA within 60 days of receipt of the 
Final Order. 

In regard to Item 6 of the Notice pertaining to Magellan failing to not include 
team training and exercises that included both controllers and other individuals, 
defined by the operator, who would reasonably be expected to operationally 
collaborate with controllers (control room personnel) during normal, abnormal or 
emergency situations, Magellan must modify it procedures to include team 
trainings and exercises that include both controllers and those who would be 
expected to collaborate with controllers, i.e., “others.”.  The procedure must 
include the topics to be covered during the training sessions. Magellan must also 
modify its procedures to include training for all modes of operation (normal, 
abnormal and emergency) as well as some soft skills.  The operator must then 
complete the team training for all “others” and controllers and provide 
documentation of within 90 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E. 

It  is requested that Magellan Pipeline, LLC, maintain documentation of the safety 
improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit 
the total to Gregory Ochs, Director, Central Region, Pipeline and Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration.  It is requested that these costs be reported in 
two categories: 1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of plans, 
procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with replacements, 
additions and other changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
