NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO:  Michael.Koby@Enbridge.com; 
David.Stafford@Enbridge.com; Bradley.Salo@Enbridge.com 

February 13, 2024 

Mr. Michael Koby 
Vice President, US Operations 
Enbridge Pipelines (Southern Lights), L.L.C. 
915 N Eldridge Parkway, 
Suite 1100, Houston, TX 77079 

Dear Mr. Koby: 

CPF 3-2024-016-NOPV 

From February 14 to July 27, 2023, a representative of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 United 
States Code (U.S.C.), inspected Enbridge Pipelines (Southern Lights), L.L.C.’s (“Enbridge”) Line 
13 Manhattan Terminal near Manhattan, Illinois. 

As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that Enbridge has committed a probable violation of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The item inspected 
and the probable violation is: 

1. 

§ 195.426 Scraper and sphere facilities. 
No operator may use a launcher or receiver that is not equipped with a relief device 
capable of safely relieving pressure in the barrel before insertion or removal of 
scrapers or spheres. The operator must use a suitable device to indicate that 
pressure has been relieved in the barrel or must provide a means to prevent 
insertion or removal of scrapers or spheres if pressure has not been relieved in the 
barrel. 

At the time of the field inspection, the lead PHMSA inspector observed that Enbridge’s launcher 
at the Line 13 Southern Lights Manhattan Terminal was equipped with a relief device that was not 
capable of safely relieving pressure in the barrel before insertion or removal of scrapers or spheres 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
in-service. In failing to maintain the safety relief device in a functional manner, the operator failed 
to comply with § 195.426. 

Proposed Civil Penalty 
We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved in this case, and have 
decided not to propose a civil penalty assessment at this time. 

Proposed Compliance Order 
With respect to Item 1, pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Enbridge. Please refer to the Proposed 
Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this Notice. 

Response to this Notice 
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators 
in Enforcement Proceedings. Please refer to this document and note the response options. All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available. If 
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment 
under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second 
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted 
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential 
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options. If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order. If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice. The Region 
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted 
demonstrating good cause for an extension. 

In your correspondence on this matter please refer to CPF 3-2024-016-NOPV and, for each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

Sincerely, 

Gregory A. Ochs 
Director, Central Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

cc: 

David Stafford (David.Stafford@Enbridge.com) 
Bradley Salo (Bradley.Salo@Enbridge.com) 

Enclosures:  Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to Enbridge a Compliance Order incorporating the 
following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of Enbridge with the pipeline safety 
regulations: 

A. 

In regard to Item 1 of the Notice pertaining to Enbridge’s failure to use a launcher 
or receiver that is equipped with a relief device capable of safely relieving 
pressure in the barrel before insertion or removal of scrapers or spheres, Enbridge 
must train their field personnel in proper use of relief devices associated with 
launcher and receivers and 49 C.F.R. § 195.426 and then provide documentation 
of this training to Central Region Director, Gregory A. Ochs, within 180 days of 
receipt of the Final Order. 

It is requested that Enbridge maintain documentation of the safety improvement 
costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit the total to 
Gregory A. Ochs, Director, Central Region, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration. It is requested that these costs be reported in two 
categories: (1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of plans, procedures, 
studies and analyses, and (2) total cost associated with replacements, additions 
and other changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
