NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
PROPOSED CIVIL PENALTY 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO:  matt@tallgrass.com; Kale.Stanton@tallgrass.com 

September 8, 2023 

Mr. Matt Sheehy 
President/ CEO 
Tallgrass 
370 Van Gordon Street 
Lakewood, CO  80228 

Dear Mr. Sheehy: 

CPF 3-2023-016-NOPV 

From October 3 to November 4, 2022, a representative of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 
United States Code (U.S.C.) inspected by video conference your Control Room Management 
records in Lakewood, Colorado. 

As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that you have committed probable violations of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).  The items inspected 
and the probable violations are: 

1. 

192.631 Control room management. 

(a)…. 
(c)  Provide adequate information.  Each operator must provide its controllers with 
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to 
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each 
of the following: 
(1)…. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) Test and verify an internal communication plan to provide adequate means for manual 
operation of the pipeline safely, at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not 
to exceed 15 months. 

Tallgrass failed to complete a test to verify their internal communication plan for the manual 
operation of the pipeline, within the required interval (once each calendar year not to exceed 15 
months).  A test was completed on 01/22/2019 and the next test was completed on 11/02/2020 
followed by a test on 12/5/2021.  The 2020 test should have been completed on or before 
04/21/2020 to meet required interval of once each calendar year, not to exceed 15 
months.  Completing the test on 11/02/2020 exceeded the interval by 195 days. 

Additionally, a review of test documentation records revealed that for some records (Rockport, 
Guernsey West, Guernsey East and Trailblazer) Tallgrass did not provide the times the pressure 
or flow values were recorded in communication from the field. 

The operator indicated that the timing of the 2020 test was in the "heat" of COVID and lock 
down.  A deviation was not filed pursuant to §192.631(j)(2). A deviation was not filed pursuant 
to § 192.631(j)(2). 

2. 

192.631 Control room management. 

(a)…. 
(c) Provide adequate information.  Each operator must provide its controllers with 
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to 
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each 
of the following: 
(1)…. 
(4)  Test any backup SCADA systems at least once each calendar year, but at 
intervals not to exceed 15 months; 

Tallgrass’s records did not demonstrate compliance with testing both back-up SCADA control 
room systems/facilities, local (360) and off site (Fort Collins), at least once each calendar year, 
but at intervals not to exceed 15 months, to provide adequate information, tools, processes, and 
procedures to its controllers for them to carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has 
defined. 

Documentation was provided for back-up control room tests for 4/25/2019, 5/13/2020 and 
5/02/2021 for only one location (Fort Collins).  On the test form (OCC Backup Site Test 
Checklist:  Gas Pipelines), it is unclear if these tests are for the 360 local backup center or Fort 
Collins because the file name indicated Fort Collins. At a minimum 6 records should have been 
provided, one for each location (Fort Collins and 360). A review of the Task Data Base, which 
documents compliance task completion, shows there were two SCADA Backup System Tests for 
2020: 10/27/20 and 5/13/20.  There were three dates in 2021: 05/03/21, 04/04/21 (noted as FRII) 
and 3/23/21(noted as 360). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3. 

192.631 Control room management. 

(a)…. 
(e) Alarm management. Each operator using a SCADA system must have a written 
alarm management plan to provide for effective controller response to alarms.  An 
operator’s plan must include provisions to: 
(1)  Review SCADA safety-related alarm operations using a process that ensures 
alarms are accurate and support safe pipeline operations; 

Tallgrass failed to follow the Tallgrass Alarm Management Plan (provided to PHMSA on 
10/17/2022) page 28 & 29 of 49 to properly identify safety related points in the database.  A 
review of the point-to-point (P2P) records for REX Cheyenne Hub and REX Connector did not 
demonstrate adequate implementation of safety related points. The SCADA tags, verified during 
the P2P,  identified a possible failure to properly identify the safety related points in the 
database.  The Alarm Management Plan, Safety Related Point Section, identified several points 
that Tallgrass considered safety related but were marked as "False" in the Safety Related Column 
of the database.  The data base did not implement the procedure for safety related points.  The 
Safety Related Column in the SCADA database should have been marked “True” to designate 
the point as safety related. There were 17 points for 51_REX Cheyenne P2P and 9 points for 
51_REX Connector P2P, which included Emergency Shut Down (ESD), fire, compressor station 
suction and discharge pressures, MLV (Main Line Valve) Breaks. 

4. 

192.631 Control room management. 
(a)…. 
(e) Alarm management.  Each operator using a SCADA system must have a written 
alarm management plan to provide for effective controller response to alarms.  An 
operator’s plan must include provisions to: 
(1)…. 
(2) Identify at least once each calendar month points affecting safety that have been 
taken off scan in the SCADA host, have had alarms inhibited, generated false 
alarms, or that have had forced or manual values for periods of  time exceeding that 
required for associated maintenance or operating activities. 

Tallgrass failed to provide records that demonstrated compliance with identifying at least once 
each calendar month points affecting safety that have been taken off scan in the SCADA host, 
have had alarms inhibited, generated false alarms, or that have had forced or manual values for 
periods of time exceeding that required for associated maintenance or operating activities. 
Records of monthly reviews in July 2019, May 2020, July 2021, October 2021, January 2022 -
August 2022 were provided for review. Tallgrass only identified when points had been placed in 
these states and if, at the time of the monthly report, they were still in that state.  The report did 
not capture a point that was placed in the state and then taken off during the month, and it did not 
capture when it was then placed back in normal state.  This is important information to verify 
that points are not exceeding time required for associated maintenance or operating activities, as 
well for as analyzing reasons for the action. Such information effectuates effective controller 
response to alarms. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tallgrass had different nomenclature, defined in the Tallgrass Alarm Management Plan -Table 
12 on pages 43, 44, 45 of 49, for the conditions stated in code §192.631(e)(2). The records 
provided lists of points out of service/off-scan, inhibit-line break, inhibit-OS, suppressed-
disabled/inhibit, manual-forced/overridden.  A date and time column were provided that 
indicated the date the point placed off scan/out of service or inhibited, but no date for when the 
point returned to service to verify that points were not exceeding time required for associated 
maintenance or operating activities.  There was no date when the review was completed. Nor did 
it state who completed the review.  Many of the identified points represented points that were no 
longer utilized or had been designed in SCADA, but not connected to the field.  These points 
cluttered the report and made the active points that were taken off-scan, inhibited, or 
forced/manual difficult to distinguish. These issues inhibit effective controller response to 
alarms. 

5. 

192.631 Control room management. 

(a)…. 
(e) Alarm management.  Each operator using a SCADA system must have a written 
alarm management plan to provide for effective controller response to alarms.  An 
operator’s plan must include provisions to: 
(1)…. 
(3) Verify the correct safety-related alarm set-point values and alarm descriptions at 
least once each calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months; 

Tallgrass failed to provide a procedure to verify the correct safety-related alarm set-point values 
and alarm descriptions at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 
months.  The CRM Plan in section 6.1 restated the regulation § 192.631(e)(3). In the Alarm 
Management Plan (AMP), under section titled Annual Alarm Management Plan Review - Audit 
item 3, restated § 192.631(e)(3). There was no process for how the operator would conduct this 
review requires verification of the correct safety-related set point values and alarm 
descriptions.  The operator did not demonstrate compliance. 

As a result of in inadequate procedure, the operator failed to verify the correct safety-related 
alarm set-point values and alarm descriptions at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not 
to exceed 15 months.  A review of the Annual Safety Related Tag Review records for 2019, 
2020 and 2021 provided by the operator to demonstrate a review of safety related set points 
identified SCADA tags were listed along with the alarm description and whether it was safety 
related or not indicated by True (safety related) or False (not safety related). The point was also 
identified as analogue or digital.  Alarm set points were not identified for any tags in the 
spreadsheet.  The operator indicated their review was to verify if the point was safety related and 
then to correctly designate that in the database. The regulation requires verification of the correct 
safety-related set point values and alarm descriptions.  The operator did not demonstrate 
compliance. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
6. 

192.631 Control room management. 

(a)…. 
(e) Alarm management.  Each operator using a SCADA system must have a written 
alarm management plan to provide for effective controller response to alarms.  An 
operator’s plan must include provisions to: 
(1)…. 
(4) Review the alarm management plan required by this paragraph at least once 
each calendar year, but at intervals not exceeding 15 months, to determine the 
effectiveness of the plan; 

Tallgrass failed to provide detailed records that demonstrated they reviewed their alarm 
management plan at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not exceeding 15 months to 
determine the effectiveness of the plan. 

Table 14 of Tallgrass’ Annual AMP Review Tabs for Review and Business Driver of the Alarm 
Management Plan (no revision or date provided) was described as “[a] list of the agenda items 
reviewed and discussed in delivering the ‘Director-Led independent annual review’ on a ‘by 
console’ basis, being keen on the trending analysis. This review is designed and purposed to be 
all-encompassing.”  This table provided the metrics as to what would be considered to determine 
plan effectiveness.  Information as to how this would be documented and how findings would be 
documented and addressed/corrected was missing.  This gap was evidenced upon review of the 
records. The operator provided no supporting documentation, work papers, controller interview 
results or metrics from Table 14 of the AMP to demonstrate compliance. The only record 
provided was the completion task in the compliance data base.  This was not adequate to 
demonstrate compliance. 

Additionally, Tallgrass failed to complete the 2020 Alarm Management Plan review in the 
required interval of once each Calendar year not to exceed 15 months.  The 2019 plan was 
completed on 4/8/2019 and required to be completed by 7/6/2020. It was not completed until 
11/23/20, representing 140 days beyond required interval. 

7. 

192.631 Control room management. 
(a)…. 
(h) Training.  Each operator must establish a controller training program and 
review the training program content to identify potential improvements at least 
once each calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months.  An operator’s 
program must provide for training each controller to carry out the roles and 
responsibilities defined by the operator.  In addition, the training program must 
include the following elements: 

 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1)…. 
(6)  Control room team training and exercises that include both controllers and 
other individuals, defined by the operator, who would reasonably be expected to 
operationally collaborate with controllers (control room personnel) during normal, 
abnormal or emergency situations.  Operators must comply with the team training 
requirements under this paragraph by no later than January 23, 2018. 

Tallgrass failed to conduct team training in 2019 and 2020.  Tallgrass indicated they were aware 
of the requirement in 2019 but did not complete training.  In 2020 they were limited due to the 
COVID pandemic. No documentation of deviation was maintained pursuant to § 192.632(j)(2).  

8. 

192.631 Control room management. 

(a)…. 
(j) Compliance and deviations.  An operator must maintain for review during 
inspection-
(1)  Records that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section; 

Tallgrass failed to maintain shift change records demonstrating compliance with § 192.631. 
These records were originally developed in an old application and were not available when the 
new application was implemented. The format used in 2019 was created in SharePoint. Records 
were requested for July 8, 2019, for both consoles (4 shift turnover documents).  The information 
was retrieved from an export of data and presented for review in Excel format.  All that was 
available for review in the spreadsheet was the date and time the handover was completed, the 
controller’s name, and the pipeline system.  No other information was available for 
review.  When Tallgrass switched to a new format, away from the SharePoint form, for their 
shift change documentation, this detail information was not maintained. This violation is a repeat 
of violations found in CPF # 3-2020-1008 Item # 4. 

Proposed Civil Penalty 
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a 
related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before 
January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the 
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after May 3, 2021 and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before 
May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation 
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before 
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a 
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679.  For violation occurring on or after November 2, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
2015 and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per 
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022. 

We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documentation involved for the above 
probable violation and recommend that you be preliminarily assessed a civil penalty of $197,300 
as follows: 

Item number 
1 
2 
7 
8 

PENALTY 
$39,100 
$36,100 
$39,100 
$83,000 

Proposed Compliance Order 
With respect to Item numbers 3, 4, 5, and 6 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and 
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Tallgrass.  
Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this 
Notice. 

Response to this Notice 
This amended Notice is issued in accordance with 49 C.F.R. § 190.207(c).  Any response you 
may have submitted to the original Notice is no longer applicable.  You must respond as set forth 
below. 

Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators 
in Enforcement Proceedings.  Please refer to this document and note the response options.  All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available.  If 
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment 
under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second 
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted 
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential 
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  The Region 
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted 
demonstrating good cause for an extension. 

In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 3-2023-016-NOPV and, for each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 

Gregory A. Ochs 
Director, Central Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

cc: 

Kale Stanton, Director Asset Integrity, Kale.Stanton@tallgrass.com 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to Tallgrass a Compliance Order incorporating the
following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of Tallgrass with the pipeline safety 
regulations: 

A. 

B. 

C. 

In regard to Item number 3 of the Notice pertaining to Tallgrass’s failure to 
properly identify and implement safety related points in the SCADA database, 
Tallgrass must identify, though procedure, which points are safety related and 
which alarms are safety related. In the SCADA master database, Tallgrass must 
implement the designation of these points as safety related within 90 days of 
receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item number 4 of the Notice pertaining to Tallgrass’ failure to 
provide records that demonstrated compliance with identifying at least once each 
calendar month points affecting safety that have been taken off scan in the 
SCADA host, have had alarms inhibited, generated false alarms, or that have had 
forced or manual values for periods of time exceeding that required for associated 
maintenance or operating activities, Tallgrass must amend its procedure to include 
a report that provides both the date and time the point was placed in the associated 
state and when it was removed.  It also needs to include a requirement to review 
SCADA logs, MOC documents and the like to determine and document the 
reason for the action, the length of time the point was in the associated state and if 
the time period exceeded the period that was required for associated maintenance 
or operating activities.  The procedure also needs to include the requirement to 
document the date and individual(s) completing the review.  The SCADA master 
database needs to be reviewed to address the points that have been designed but 
not integrated to the field as well as the historical points.  The monthly report 
should either not include these items or they can be filtered to allow reviewers to 
only look at the relevant information. Tallgrass must amend its procedure and 
carry out this SCADA review and provide evidence to PHMSA of the data base 
and monthly reports within 60 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item number 5 of the Notice pertaining to Tallgrass’ failure to 
provide a procedure to verify the correct safety-related alarm set-point values and 
alarm descriptions at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 
15 months, Tallgrass must amend its procedure to detail the process it employs for 
the annual review of safety-related alarm set-point values and alarm descriptions. 
The procedure needs to include how identified deficiencies will be documented 
and resolved as well as how this review will be documented, and how records will 
be preserved for inspection.  Additionally, the operator needs to conduct a 
verification using the amended procedure to verify the correct safety-related alarm 
set-point values and alarm descriptions.  Tallgrass must amend its procedure and 
conduct this verification within 60 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D. 

E. 

In regard to Item number 6 of the Notice pertaining to Tallgrass’ failure to 
provide detailed records that demonstrated compliance with reviewing their alarm 
management plan at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not exceeding 
15 months to determine the effectiveness of the plan, Tallgrass must amend its 
procedure to detail the documentation of the topics that will be included in the 
annual review of the Alarm Management Plan. Tallgrass must clarify what will be 
included in the review to coordinate what Table 14 states in comparison to the 
procedure.   A review must be conducted using the amended procedure and 
documentation process within 60 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

It  is requested that Tallgrass maintain documentation of the safety improvement 
costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit the total to 
Gregory Ochs, Director, Central Region, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration, OPS.  It is requested that these costs be reported in two 
categories: 1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of plans, procedures, 
studies and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with replacements, additions and 
other changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
