NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL 

June 13, 2023 

Vidal Rosa 
Senior Vice President of Operations 
Navigator Borger Express LLC 
2626 Cole Avenue, Suite 900 
Dallas, Texas 75204 

Dear Mr. Rosa: 

CPF 4-2023-053-NOPV 

From January 24 to May 20, 2022, a representative of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 United 
States  Code  (U.S.C.)  was  onsite  and  inspected  Navigator  Borger  Express,  LLC’s  (Navigator) 
pipeline construction project in Oklahoma and Texas. 

As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that Navigator committed a probable violation of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).  The item inspected and 
the probable violation is: 

1. 

§ 195.202 Compliance with specifications or standards. 

Each  pipeline  system  must  be  constructed  in  accordance  with 
comprehensive written specifications or standards that are consistent 
with the requirements of this part. 

Navigator  failed  to  construct  each  pipeline  system  in  accordance  with  comprehensive  written 
specifications or standards that are consistent with the requirements of Part 195 in accordance with 
§  195.202.  Specifically,  Navigator  failed  to  follow  its  written  procedure,  Flanged  Pipe  and 
Equipment  Bolting  (Revision  A;  1/7/2019),  Section  3.0  Bolting  Materials,  which  stated  that  “a 
minimum of three threads shall protrude beyond the nut face after the nut is completely torqued” 
and Section 6.0 Gasket Installation and Bolt Torquing Procedure which stated that Navigator must 
“[u]se rotational tightening until all nuts do not move under 100% torque.  There shall not be less 
than three threads showing on the outside of each nut after they are completely torqued.” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
During the field inspection on March 10, 2022, PHMSA observed that Navigator used the incorrect 
length of bolts (studs and nuts) at the Ruby and Marshall pump stations resulting in less than three 
threads showing on multiple flange fittings and on multiple valves.  At these locations, PHMSA 
observed multiple bolts with less than three threads protruding beyond the nut faces as required by 
Navigator’s  procedure.  Navigator  failed  to  ensure  that  a  minimum  of  three  threads  protruded 
beyond the nut face. 

Therefore, Navigator failed to construct each pipeline system in accordance with comprehensive 
written  specifications  or  standard  that  are  consistent  with  the  requirements  of  Part  195  in 
accordance with § 195.202. 

Proposed Compliance Order 
PHMSA has reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved in this case and have 
decided not to propose a civil penalty assessment at this time. 

With respect to Item 1 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Navigator Borger Express, LLC.  Please 
refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this Notice. 

Response to this Notice 
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators in 
Enforcement  Proceedings.  Please  refer  to  this  document  and  note  the  response  options.  All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available.  If you 
believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment under 5 
U.S.C. § 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second copy of 
the  document  with  the  portions  you  believe  qualify  for  confidential  treatment  redacted  and  an 
explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential treatment under 
5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a  waiver  of  your  right  to  contest  the  allegations  in  this  Notice  and  authorizes  the  Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  The Region Director 
may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted demonstrating good 
cause for an extension. 

In  your  correspondence  on  this  matter,  please  refer  to  CPF  4-2023-053-NOPV  and,  for  each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 

Bryan Lethcoe 
Director, Southwest Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

cc: 

Vanessa Romero, Manager, EHS/Regulatory, vromero@nesmidstream.com 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant  to  49  United  States  Code  §  60118,  the  Pipeline  and  Hazardous  Materials  Safety 
Administration  (PHMSA)  proposes  to  issue  to  Navigator  Borger  Express,  LLC  (Navigator)  a 
Compliance Order incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of 
Navigator with the pipeline safety regulations: 

A. 

B. 

In  regard  to  1  of  the  Notice  pertaining  to  Navigator’s  failure  to  construct  each 
pipeline  system  in  accordance  with  comprehensive  written  specifications  or 
standard  that  are  consistent  with  the  requirements  of  Part  195,  Navigator  must 
ensure that all nuts on flanges and valves at all newly constructed pump stations, 
including  the  Ruby  and  Marshall  pump  stations,  are  installed  according  to  its 
procedure  - Flanged  Pipe  and  Equipment  Bolting  (Revision  A;  1/7/2019). 
Navigator must provide records indicating compliance with its procedures and any 
associated repair records for all bolts with less than three threads beyond the nut 
face after torqued at all newly constructed pump stations to the Director, Southwest 
Region, PHMSA within 60 days of issuance of the Final Order. 

It  is requested (not mandated) that Navigator maintain documentation of the safety 
improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit the 
total  to  Bryan  Lethcoe,  Director,  Southwest  Region,  Pipeline  and  Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration.  It is requested that these costs be reported in two 
categories: 1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of plans, procedures, 
studies and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with replacements, additions and 
other changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
