NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
PROPOSED CIVIL PENALTY 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL to: tom.long@energytransfer.com 

June 15, 2023 

Thomas Long 
Chief Executive Officer 
Energy Transfer, LP 
8111 Westchester Drive 
Dallas, Texas 75225 

Dear Mr. Long: 

CPF 4-2023-011-NOPV 

On  March  27,  2020,  representatives  of  the  Pipeline  and  Hazardous  Materials  Safety 
Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 United 
States Code (U.S.C.) conducted an investigation following an incident that occurred at Panhandle 
Eastern Pipeline Company’s (PEPL) Borcher Station near Meade, Kansas. 

On March 26, 2020, at approximately 2:00 p.m. Central Daylight Time, a PEPL technician was 
attempting to retrieve a T.D. Williamson 10-inch PitBoss™ Cleaning Pig that was stuck due to ice 
accumulation in the receiving barrel which was partially pressurized within the Borcher Station 
piping.  The technician was attempting to break the ice using a stainless-steel rod causing the pig 
to become dislodged and travel out of the receiving end of the pig trap striking the technician in 
the abdomen.  The technician later died at the hospital due to their injuries.  PHMSA’s Accident 
Investigation Division and the Central Region traveled onsite to investigate the incident. 

As a result of the investigation, it is alleged that PEPL has committed probable violations of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).  The items investigated 
and the probable violations are: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
1. 

§ 192.605 Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a) General. Each  operator  shall  prepare  and  follow  for  each 
pipeline, a manual of written procedures for conducting operations and 
maintenance activities and for emergency response. For transmission 
lines, the manual must also include procedures for handling abnormal 
operations. This manual must be reviewed and updated by the operator 
at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar 
year.  This  manual  must  be  prepared  before  operations  of  a  pipeline 
system  commence.  Appropriate  parts  of  the  manual  must  be  kept  at 
locations where operations and maintenance activities are conducted. 

PEPL failed to follow its manual of written procedures for conducting operations and maintenance 
activities and for emergency response in four areas in accordance with § 192.605(a).1  Specifically, 
PEPL 1) failed to ensure the pipe was de-energized prior to conducting maintenance in accordance 
with its written procedure, S-230; 2) failed to create a work permit and communicate the potential 
hazards to relevant personnel in accordance with its written procedure, S-370; 3) failed to follow 
two  provisions  of  its  pigging  operations  procedures  and;  4)  failed  to  follow  its  procedure  for 
clearing freezes. 

First,  PEPL  failed  to  follow  its  Safety  Procedure  S-230,  Hazardous  Energy  Control  (Lockout 
Tagout)  (Effective  08/01/2017),  which  requires  the  operator  to  de-energize  the  pipe  prior  to 
performance of scheduled activities.  On the day of the incident, PEPL failed to ensure that the 
piping at the pig receiver was clear of any hazardous energy and de-energized. 

Second,  PEPL  failed  to  follow  its  Safety  Procedure  S-370  Work  Permits  (Effective  8/1/2017), 
which  requires that a “General Work Permit” be obtained for potentially hazardous work.  Prior 
to the incident, PEPL failed to obtain a “General Work Permit” that requires identification of all 
potential hazards and communication of those hazardous to relevant personnel. 

Third, PEPL failed to follow two provisions in its Standard Operating Procedures, Pigging and 
Pig Trap Operation, Procedure: I.13 (Effective 5/1/2015).  Section 7.2 of the pigging procedures 
states that personnel cannot “stand in front of the launcher or receiver door in the project path of 
the line-cleaning tool while opening.”  On the day of the incident a PEPL technician was standing 
in front of the receiver while trying to dislodge ice. 

In addition, section 7.5 states that PEPL must “[v]erify the trap is depressured and that SOP B.06 
Hazardous  Energy  Control  and  Safety  Procedure  S-230  Lockout  Tag  out  are  followed  before 
opening the closure.”  The valves to this receiver were leaking which created pressure in the barrel 
behind the cleaner pig.  The maintenance personnel stated that it was common for the valves to 
leak.  The pressure upstream of the 10-inch main valve was over 700 psi.  On the day of the incident 
a PEPL technician opened the closure without verifying that the trap was depressured. 

Fourth,  PEPL  failed  to  follow  its  Best  Practice  Clearing  Freezes  BP  I.17(Effective  6/1/2013), 
which requires, in section 7.2, that personnel “[n]otify the operations manager of the freeze and 

1 PEPL uses the procedures of Energy Transfer Company, its parent organization. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
discuss  the  procedures  to  handling  freezes.”  PEPL  personnel  failed  to  make  the  requisite 
notification.  Section 7.3 of this same procedure states that personnel must “[b]lowdown slowly in 
either side of the freeze using the smallest valve available [ and m]aintain a differential of 50 psi 
or less across the freeze.”  PEPL failed to maintain a differential of 50 psi or less. 

PEPL’s failure to follow its written procedures was a causal factor in the incident that occurred on 
March 26, 2020. 

Therefore, PEPL failed to follow its manual of written procedures for conducting operations and 
maintenance activities and for emergency response in four areas in accordance with § 192.605(a). 

2. 

§ 192.605 Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a)  General. Each  operator  shall  prepare  and  follow  for  each 
pipeline, a manual of written procedures for conducting operations and 
maintenance activities and for emergency response. For transmission 
lines, the manual must also include procedures for handling abnormal 
operations. This manual must be reviewed and updated by the operator 
at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar 
year.  This  manual  must  be  prepared  before  operations  of  a  pipeline 
system  commence.  Appropriate  parts  of  the  manual  must  be  kept  at 
locations where operations and maintenance activities are conducted. 

(b)  Maintenance  and  normal  operations. The  manual  required  by 
paragraph (a) of this section must include procedures for the following, 
if applicable, to provide safety during maintenance and operations. 

(1) . . . . 
(8) Periodically reviewing the work done by operator personnel to 
determine  the  effectiveness,  and  adequacy  of  the  procedures  used  in 
normal  operation  and  maintenance  and  modifying  the  procedures 
when deficiencies are found. 

PEPL failed to follow its manual of written procedures for conducting operations and maintenance 
activities and for emergency response in accordance with § 192.605(a).  Specifically, PEPL failed 
to periodically review the work done by operator personnel to determine the effectiveness, and 
adequacy of the procedures used in normal operation and maintenance and modify the procedures 
when  deficiencies  are  found  in  accordance  with  § 192.605(b)(8)  and  Standard  Operating 
Procedures,  Management  of  Change:  A.03  (Effective  8/1/2017)  section  4.0  Frequency  and 
Standard  Operating  Procedures,  Guiding  Principles:  A.02  (Effective  5/1/2015)  sections  4.0 
Frequency, 7.1 Rules and 7.2 Developing an SOP.  PEPL failed to review the work performed 
under its Standard Operating Procedures, Pigging and Pig Trap Operation, Procedure: I.13, 1.0 
Procedure Description (Effective 5/1/2015).  As a result, PEPL failed to determine the procedures 
were deficient and failed to modify the procedures to provide guidance to employees for safely 
addressing ice accumulation during pigging and pig trap operation. 

PEPL’s written procedures failed to include instructions for employees encountering ice build-up 
when  launching  and  receiving  pigs.  PEPL  failed  to  conduct  effectiveness  reviews  pursuant  to 

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
§ 192.605(b)(8).  Supervisors  at  the  Borchers’  Storage  Facility  did  not  have  knowledge  of  any 
effectiveness reviews or documentation for clearing freezes.  Employees interviewed as part of 
PHMSA’s investigation noted that the line would “freeze up often” and that “ice is a problem.”  
Despite employees’ awareness of the ongoing ice accumulation issue in the line, PEPL failed to 
review  the  work  done  by  operator  personnel,  failed  to  determine  that  its  pigging  and  pig  trap 
operation procedures were ineffective, and failed to remediate the deficiency by modifying the 
procedures to include instructions to address an accumulation of ice inside launchers and receivers. 

PEPL’s failure to follow its written procedures increased the severity of the incident that occurred 
on March 26, 2020. 

Therefore, PEPL failed to follow its manual of written procedures for conducting operations and 
maintenance activities and for emergency response in accordance with § 192.605(a). 

3. 

§ 192.805 Qualification program.  

Each  operator  shall  have  and  follow  a  written  qualification 

program.  The program shall include provisions to: 

(a) Identify covered tasks; 

PEPL failed to have and follow a written Operator Qualification (OQ) Program that identified all 
covered tasks in accordance with § 192.805(a).  Specifically, PEPL’s written Standard Operating 
Procedures, Operator Qualification Plan (Effective 5/1/2018) failed to include the operation and 
maintenance task of launching and receiving pigs as a covered task in its plan. 

Therefore, PEPL failed to comply with § 192.805(a). 

Proposed Civil Penalty 
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a related 
series of violations. For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before January 6, 2023, 
the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the violation persists, up to 
a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after 
May  3, 2021  and before  March  21, 2022,  the  maximum  penalty  may  not  exceed  $225,134  per 
violation  per  day the  violation  persists,  up to  a  maximum  of  $2,251,334  for  a related  series  of 
violations.  For  violation  occurring  on  or  after  January  11,  2021  and  before  May  3,  2021,  the 
maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a 
maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after July 
31,  2019  and  before  January  11,  2021,  the  maximum  penalty  may  not  exceed  $218,647  per 
violation  per  day the  violation  persists,  up to  a  maximum  of  $2,186,465  for  a  related  series  of 
violations. For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before July 31, 2019, the 
maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to 
exceed $2,132,679. For violation occurring on or after November 2, 2015 and before November 
27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per violation per day, with a maximum 
penalty not to exceed $2,090,022. 

 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We  have  reviewed  the  circumstances  and  supporting  documentation  involved  for  the  above 
probable  violations  and  recommend  that  you  be  preliminarily  assessed  a  civil  penalty  of 
$2,473,912 as follows: 

Item number 
1 
2 
3 

PENALTY 
$218,647 
$2,186,465 
$68,800 

Proposed Compliance Order 
With respect to Items 2 and 3 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety  Administration  proposes  to  issue  a  Compliance  Order  to  Panhandle  Eastern  Pipeline 
Company. Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of 
this Notice. 

Response to this Notice 
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators in 
Enforcement Proceedings. Please refer to this document and note the response options. All material 
you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available. If you believe 
that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 
552(b),  along  with  the  complete  original  document  you  must  provide  a  second  copy  of  the 
document  with  the  portions  you  believe  qualify  for  confidential  treatment  redacted  and  an 
explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential treatment under 
5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options. If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a  waiver  of  your  right  to  contest  the  allegations  in  this  Notice  and  authorizes  the  Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order. If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice. The Region Director 
may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted demonstrating good 
cause for an extension. 

In  your  correspondence  on  this  matter,  please  refer  to  CPF  4-2023-011-NOPV  and,  for  each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sincerely, 

Bryan Lethcoe 
Director, Southwest Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

cc: 

Greg McIlwain, Executive Vice President, Operations, Energy Transfer LP, 
greg.mcilwain@energytransfer.com 
Eric Amundsen, Senior Vice President, Operations, Energy Transfer LP, 
Eric.Amundsen@energytransfer.com 
Todd Stamm, Senior Vice President, Operations, Energy Transfer LP, 
todd.stamm@energytransfer.com 
Jennifer Street, Senior Vice President, Operations Services, Energy Transfer LP, 
jennifer.street@energytransfer.com 
Heidi Murchison, Chief Counsel, Energy Transfer LP, 
heidi.murchison@energytransfer.com 
Leif Jensen, Vice President, Technical Services, Energy Transfer LP, 
leif.jensen@energytransfer.com 
Todd Nardozzi, Director, Regulatory Compliance, Energy Transfer LP, 
todd.nardozzi@energytransfer.com 
Susie Sjulin, Director – Regulatory Compliance, Energy Transfer LP, 
susie.sjulin@energytransfer.com 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant  to  49  United  States  Code  §  60118,  the  Pipeline  and  Hazardous  Materials  Safety 
Administration  (PHMSA)  proposes  to  issue  to  Panhandle  Eastern  Pipeline  Company  (PEPL)  a 
Compliance Order incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of 
pipeline safety regulations: 

A. 

In  regard  to  Item  2  of  the  Notice  pertaining  to  PEPL’s  failure  to  perform  an 
effectiveness review of its procedures and to have procedures and guidelines for ice 
accumulation when launching and receiving pigs, PEPL must: 

1.  Conduct an effectiveness review of its procedures for Pigging and Pig 
Trap  Operations  and  Clearing  Freezes  Best  Practice  by  reviewing 
employees’ experiences at each of the PEPL facilities and identifying 
the facilities where employees may encounter ice in the PEPL system 
within 60 days of issuance of the Final Order; 

2.  Identify specific locations on the pipeline at each facility where icing 

may occur; 

3.  Create  and  implement  new  procedures  for  each  specific  location  and 
detailed  guidelines  for  employees  encountering  ice  build-up  when 
launching  and  receiving  pigs  and  submit  the  new  procedures  to  the 
Director, Southwest Region, PHMSA within 240 days of issuance of the 
Final Order; and 

4.  Train  all  PEPL  employees  responsible  for  following  the  site-specific 

procedures within 365 days of issuance of the Final Order. 

B. 

In  regard  to  Item  3  of  the  Notice  pertaining  to  PEPL’s  failure  to  include  the 
launching and receiving of pigs in its written Operator Qualification (OQ) Program, 
PEPL must: 

1.  Amend its written operator qualification program to include launching 

and receiving pigs as a covered task; 

2.  Identify and qualify all PEPL employees responsible for performing the 

new covered task; and 

3.  Submit  the  amended  Operation  Qualification  Plan  and  qualification 
records to the Director, Southwest Region, PHMSA within 210 days of 
issuance of the Final Order. 

C.  It 

is  requested  (not  mandated)  that  Panhandle  Eastern  Pipeline  Company  maintain 
documentation of the safety improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance 
Order  and  submit  the  total to  Bryan Lethcoe,  Director,  Southwest  Region, Pipeline and 
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration.  It is requested that these costs be reported in 
two  categories:  1)  total  cost  associated  with  preparation/revision  of  plans,  procedures, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
studies and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with replacements, additions and other 
changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
