NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: tom.long@energytransfer.com 

October 18, 2023 

Thomas Long 
Chief Executive Officer 
Energy Transfer Company 
8111 Westchester Drive 
Dallas, Texas 75225 

Dear Mr. Long: 

CPF 4-2023-047-NOPV 

From  September  19,  2022,  to  January  12,  2023,  representatives  of  the  Pipeline  and Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 
601 of 49 United States Code  (U.S.C.)  inspected Enable Gas Transmission, LLC (Enable) and 
Enable Mississippi River Transmission, LLC (EMRT) in Oklahoma City, OK. 

As a result of  the inspection,  it  is  alleged that you have committed a  probable violation of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).  The item inspected 
and the probable violation is: 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
1. 

§ 192.605 Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a)  General.  Each  operator  shall  prepare  and  follow  for  each 
pipeline, a manual of written procedures for conducting operations and 
maintenance activities and for emergency response. For transmission 
lines, the manual must also include procedures for handling abnormal 
operations. This manual must be reviewed and updated by the operator 
at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar 
year.  This  manual  must  be  prepared  before  operations  of  a  pipeline 
system  commence.  Appropriate  parts  of  the  manual  must  be  kept  at 
locations where operations and maintenance activities are conducted. 

§ 192.710 Transmission lines: Assessments outside of high consequence areas. 

(a) Applicability:  This section applies to onshore steel transmission 
pipeline  segments  with  a  maximum  allowable  operating  pressure  of 
greater than or equal to 30% of the specified minimum yield strength 
and are located in: 

(1) A Class 3 or Class 4 location; or 
(2)  A  moderate  consequence  area  as  defined  in  §  192.3,  if  the 
pipeline  segment  can  accommodate  inspection  by  means  of  an 
instrumented inline inspection tool (i.e., “smart pig”). 

(3)  This section does  not  apply  to  a  pipeline segment located in a 

high consequence area as defined in § 192.903. 

Enable  failed  to  follow  its  manual  of  written  procedures  for  conducting  operations  and 
maintenance activities and for emergency response in accordance with § 192.605(a).  Specifically, 
Enable failed to follow sections 3 and 3.1 of Energy Transfer’s Pipeline Integrity Management 
Plan: 192.710 ETC Gas Plan (Rev. 3; Apr. 15, 2022),1 which required identification of Moderate 
Consequence Areas (MCAs) and other pipe segments subject to § 192.710. 

At multiple locations, roadway and structure MCAs, as defined in § 192.3, were not identified, or 
were miss-identified within Enable’s Long Term Assessment Plan (LTAP) and Keyhole Markup 
Language, Zipped (KMZ) files for the provided systems. 

At two locations Enable failed to identify a roadway that was within one of its pipeline’s Potential 
Impact Radius (PIR) as an MCA. 

1 Enable used the procedures of its parent company, Energy Transfer.  Starting in July 2022, Enable detailed their 
approach to identifying and assessing MCAs in Sections 3 and 3.1 of Energy Transfer’s Pipeline Integrity 
Management Plan: 192.710 ETC Gas Plan (Rev. 3; Apr. 15, 2022).1  Prior to July 2022, Enable used Section 4 of 
Enable’s Integrity Management Program: Moderate Consequence Areas Identification PS-202 (Ver. 2; Sept. 1 
2020). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
    
1)  Pipeline OM-1 is a 20-inch natural gas transmission pipeline that meets the requirements 
of § 192.710(a)(2).  The pipeline goes under a roadway, labeled on mapping as US 549 
HWY and Interstate 49, Northwest of Bentonville, AR.  The intersected roadway is within 
the PIR of the pipeline, labeled as a Principle Arterial Roadway (PAR), and was not labeled 
as an MCA by Enable.  Digital imagery confirmed the roadway met the definition of MCA 
(§ 192.3(1)(ii)). 

2)  Pipeline Line B is a 10-inch natural gas transmission pipeline that meets the requirements 
of § 192.710(a)(1).  The line is located in a Class 3 location. The pipeline parallels and 
intersects a roadway, labeled on mapping as Interstate 40 in Mayflower, AR.  The portion 
of the roadway that parallels the pipeline is within the PIR of the pipeline, labeled as a 
PAR, and was not labeled as an MCA by Enable.  Digital imagery confirmed the roadway 
met the definition of MCA (§ 192.3(1)(ii)).  This MCA must be identified for the annual 
and incident reporting requirements. 

At two locations Enable failed to identify structures that were within the PIR as an MCA. 

1)  Pipeline JM-30 is a 10-inch natural gas transmission pipeline that meets the requirements 
of § 192.710(a)(2).  The pipeline is south of Vilonia, AR, has 5 or more structures intended 
for human occupancy, and was not correctly labeled as an MCA.  The existing MCA does 
not extend far enough south to capture all the structures meeting the definition of MCA (§ 
192.3(1)(i)). 

2)  Pipeline JM-8 is a 6-inch natural gas transmission pipeline that meets the requirements of 
§ 192.710(a)(1).  The line is located in a Class 3 location. The pipeline is in Searcy, AR, 
has 5 or more structures intended for human occupancy, and was not labeled as an MCA 
by the operator at time of inspection. The existing High Consequence Area (HCA) to the 
south does not capture all the structures at location that create an MCA or HCA.  Digital 
imagery confirmed the structure count met the definition of MCA (§ 192.3(1)(i)).  This 
MCA must be identified for the annual and incident reporting requirements. 

Therefore, Enable failed to follow its manual of written procedures for conducting operations and 
maintenance activities and for emergency response in accordance with § 192.605(a). 

Proposed Compliance Order 
With respect to Item 1 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Enable Gas Transmission, LLC.  Please 
refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this Notice. 

Response to this Notice 
This amended Notice is issued in accordance with 49 C.F.R. § 190.207(c).  Any response you may 
have submitted to the original Notice is no longer applicable.  You must respond as set forth below. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators in 
Enforcement  Proceedings.  Please  refer  to  this  document  and  note  the  response  options.  All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available.  If you 
believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment under 5 
U.S.C. § 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second copy of 
the  document  with  the  portions  you  believe  qualify  for  confidential  treatment  redacted  and  an 
explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential treatment under 
5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a  waiver  of  your  right  to  contest  the  allegations  in  this  Notice  and  authorizes  the  Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  The Region Director 
may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted demonstrating good 
cause for an extension. 

In  your  correspondence  on  this  matter,  please  refer  to  CPF  4-2023-047-NOPV  and,  for  each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

Sincerely, 

Bryan Lethcoe 
Director, Southwest Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures:  Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

cc:  Mr. Greg McIlwain, Executive Vice President of Operations, Energy Transfer, LP, 

gregory.mcilwain@energytransfer.com 
Mr. Eric Amundsen, Senior Vice President of Operations, Energy Transfer, LP, 
eric.amundsen@energytransfer.com 
Mr. Todd Stamm, Senior Vice President of Operations, Energy Transfer, LP, 
todd.stamm@energytransfer.com 
Ms. Jennifer Street, Senior Vice President of Operations Services, Energy Transfer, LP, 
jennifer.street@energytransfer.com 
Ms. Heidi Murchison, Chief Counsel, Energy Transfer, LP, 
heidi.murchison@energytransfer.com 
Mr. Leif Jensen, Vice President of Tech Services, Energy Transfer, LP, 
leif.jensen@energytransfer.com 
Mr. Todd Nardozzi, Director, Regulatory Compliance, Energy Transfer, LP, 
todd.nardozzi@energytransfer.com 

 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ms. Susie Sjulin, Director, Regulatory Compliance, Energy Transfer, LP, 
susie.sjulin@energytransfer.com 

 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant  to  49  United  States  Code  §  60118,  the  Pipeline  and  Hazardous  Materials  Safety 
Administration  (PHMSA)  proposes  to  issue  to  Enable  Gas  Transmission,  LLC  (Enable)  a 
Compliance Order incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance 
with the pipeline safety regulations: 

A. 

B. 

In  regard  to  Item  1  of  the  Notice  pertaining  to  follow  its  manual  of  written 
procedures for conducting operations and maintenance activities and for emergency 
response  in  accordance  with  §  192.605(a),  Enable  must  review  all  processes, 
training, and methods of communication between work groups that are associated 
with the identification of Moderate Consequence Areas (MCAs) to determine how 
existing structure and roadway MCAs were not previously identified and provide 
documentation of the review to the Director, Southwest Region within 90 days of 
issuance of the Final Order. Once this review is complete, Enable must ensure all 
MCAs and other pipe segments subject to § 192.710 are identified in its Long-Term 
Assessment Plan (LTAP) and submit the updated LTAP to the Director, Southwest 
Region within 90 days of issuance of the Final Order. 

It  is  requested  (not  mandated)  that  Enable  Gas  Transmission,  LLC  maintain 
documentation  of  the  safety  improvement  costs  associated  with  fulfilling  this 
Compliance  Order  and  submit  the  total  to  Bryan  Lethcoe,  Director,  Southwest 
Region,  Office  of  Pipeline  Safety,  Pipeline  and  Hazardous  Materials  Safety 
Administration.  It is requested that these costs be reported in two categories: 1) 
total  cost  associated  with  preparation/revision  of  plans,  procedures,  studies  and 
analyses,  and  2)  total  cost  associated  with  replacements,  additions  and  other 
changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
