NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: Josiah.patkotak@north-slope.org 

November 2, 2023 

The Honorable Josiah Patkotak 
Mayor of the North Slope Borough 
North Slope Borough Energy Management 
P.O. Box 69 
Utqiagvik, AK 99723 

Dear Mayor Patkotak: 

CPF 5-2023-039-NOPV 

From October 17 through October 20, 2022 of the on-site inspection, a representative of the 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety 
(OPS), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 United States Code (U.S.C.), inspected the procedures and 
records of the North Slope Borough Energy Management’s (NSB), Nuiqsut Gas Distribution 
System, in Nuiqsut, Alaska. 

As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that you have committed probable violations of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The items inspected 
and the probable violations are: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. 

§ 192.605  Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a) General.  Each operator shall prepare and follow for each pipeline, a manual of 
written procedures for conducting operations and maintenance activities and for 
emergency response. For transmission lines, the manual must also include 
procedures for handling abnormal operations. This manual must be reviewed and 
updated by the operator at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each 
calendar year. This manual must be prepared before operations of a pipeline system 
commence. Appropriate parts of the manual must be kept at locations where 
operations and maintenance activities are conducted. 

NSB failed to follow its Management of Change (MOC) procedures as required under § 
192.605(a) and directly outlined in its Operations and Maintenance (O&M) manuala. 
Specifically, NSB significantly altered the pipeline monitoring system without prior notification 
to field personnel (contractors), Nuiqsut Utility Cooperation (NUC). 

PHMSA observed a computer display located within the Nuiqsut gas distribution operations 
office. The field personnel present during the inspection alleged prior to July 2022, the computer 
monitoring system within the Nuiqsut gas distribution operations office mirrored the Controller 
Display Panel located within the Nuiqsut PRV Station, displaying real-time data and alarm 
notifications, and was utilized daily to check system parameters and ensure that any safety issues 
or trends could be addressed immediately. 

However, the computer display observed at the time of the inspection could only be used to 
obtain past historian information through an NSB server. Field personnel could not provide 
documentation to demonstrate that the MOC process had been followed in accordance with the 
O&M manual. Additionally, field personnel onsite alleged that NSB changed the monitoring 
system without communicating a MOC change to the field personnel, in violation of its 
procedures outlined in the O&M manual.a 

Therefore, NSB failed to follow as its procedures as required pursuant to § 192.605(a). 

a Exhibit A-5, O&M manual, Section 2.6, pages 7 and 8 of 525 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 

§ 192.605  Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a) General.  Each operator shall prepare and follow for each pipeline, a manual of 
written procedures for conducting operations and maintenance activities and for 
emergency response. For transmission lines, the manual must also include 
procedures for handling abnormal operations. This manual must be reviewed and 
updated by the operator at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each 
calendar year. This manual must be prepared before operations of a pipeline system 
commence. Appropriate parts of the manual must be kept at locations where 
operations and maintenance activities are conducted. 

NSB failed to review and update its operations and maintenance manuals at intervals not 
exceeding 15 months but at least once each calendar year, as required. Specifically, NSB failed 
to review and update its operations and maintenance manuals for the calendar years of 2020 and 
2021. During the inspection, PHMSA observed that the O&M manualb dated August 2019, 
revision log did not include updates beyond August 2019. Additionally, the Pipeline-Specific 
Operations and Maintenance (PSOMc) manual, dated August 2019, revision log also did not 
include updates dated beyond August 2019. 

Therefore, NSB failed to review and update its manual of written procedures once a calendar 
year, at intervals not exceeding 15 months as required per § 192.605(a). 

3. 

§ 192.605  Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a) … 
(b) Maintenance and normal operations.  The manual required by paragraph (a) of 
this section must include procedures for the following, if applicable, to provide 
safety during maintenance and operations. 
(1) … 
(8) Periodically reviewing the work done by operator personnel to determine the 
effectiveness, and adequacy of the procedures used in normal operation and 
maintenance and modifying the procedures when deficiencies are found. 

NSB failed to complete periodic effectiveness reviews, by modifying its procedures when 
deficiencies were found.  Specifically, PHMSA reviewed NSB’s records from March 28, 2015, 
through October 10, 2022, and observed that NSB had conducted the first stage of effectiveness 
reviews by identifying deficiencies in its procedures as described in the reviewed “Evaluations of 
Accelerated Action”d, and e-mailse provided. However, NSB did not modify its O&M and 
PSOM manuals based on the identified deficiencies as § 192.605(b)(8) required. 

Based on emails and other records reviewed during PHMSA’s inspection, NSB field personnel 
reviewed procedures for effectiveness but the suggested revisions to the procedures sent to NSB 

b Exhibit A-5, O&M Manual 
c Exhibit A-4, PSOM 
d Exhibit A-7, Evaluation of Accelerated Action 
e Exhibit G-1 & G-2, NUC e-mails 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
management for inclusion in the operations and maintenance manuals were not reflected in 
updated procedures and no evidence of revisions was documented. 

Therefore, NSB failed to review and modify its procedures for effectiveness in accordance with 
§ 192.605(b)(8). 

4. 

§ 192.615  Emergency plans. 

(a) Each operator shall establish written procedures to minimize the hazard 
resulting from a gas pipeline emergency. At a minimum, the procedures must 
provide for the following: 
(1) … 
(4) The availability of personnel, equipment, tools, and materials, as needed at the 
scene of an emergency. 

NSB failed to ensure the availability of personnel, equipment, tools, and materials, as needed, at 
the scene of an emergency. Specifically, the table within NSB’s PSOMf manual, showed that the 
emergency equipment items were to be located in a “tech. truck” to respond to an emergency 
event. However, during PHMSA’s inspection, field personnel provided PHMSA with verbal 
testimony stating that there had been no working vehicles supplied by NSB in the previous years. 
Field personnel also provided PHMSA with written testimonyg which demonstrated that the 
vehicle maintenance issues often left field personnel with only one operable vehicle, and stated 
that a contract between NSB and their contractor required NSB to provide two vehicles.  
Furthermore, it appeared field personnel had no working vehicles to respond to emergencies 
within the village between December 2021 and March of 2022. 

Therefore, NSB failed to ensure the availability of the equipment required in its emergency 
procedures in accordance with § 192.615(a)(4). 

5. 

§ 192.625  Odorization of gas. 

(a) … 
(f) To assure the proper concentration of odorant in accordance with this section, 
each operator must conduct periodic sampling of combustible gases using an 
instrument capable of determining the percentage of gas in air at which the odor 
becomes readily detectable. Operators of master meter systems may comply with 
this requirement by -

NSB failed to adequately conduct and record periodic sampling of combustible gases for 
odorization. Specifically, a review of NSB’s records and equipment demonstrated that its records 
were incomplete and equipment not calibrated. During the PHMSA inspection, the inspector 
found documentation for the monthly odorant checks unclear and incompleteh. A review of 
NSB’s records showed the operator’s monthly odorant check record (‘Sniff Test' and/or 

f Exhibit A-4, PSOM, Section 13.1 Emergency Response Procedures, page 48 of 94 
g Exhibit I-1, Written testimony 
h Exhibit E-1 through E-4, Odor checks 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
'Odorometer Test,' Odorization Check Report, Form 11), did not include associated units, such 
that it could not be determined whether the document was recording % LEL, % odorant by 
volume, PPM, or another measure of detection. The “DTEX” odorator instrumentation displays 
in Part Per Million (PPM); however, the measurements were allegedly documented in percent 
Lower Explosive Level (LEL). 

Additionally, the operator used equipment for the monthly odorant check that was not calibrated.  
“DTEX” sampling equipment is required to be factory calibratedi every two years to ensure the 
instrument can determine the percentage of gas in the air at which the odor becomes readily 
detectable. The operator stated that the equipment had not been calibrated within the past two 
years and no documentation was provided to demonstrate the last calibration date. 

Therefore, NSB failed to conduct and record periodic sampling of combustible gases as required 
pursuant to § 192.625(f). 

6. 

§ 192.739  Pressure limiting and regulating stations: Inspection and testing. 

(a) Each pressure limiting station, relief device (except rupture discs), and pressure 
regulating station and its equipment must be subjected at intervals not exceeding 15 
months, but at least once each calendar year, to inspections and tests to determine 
that it is -
(1) In good mechanical condition; 
(2) Adequate from the standpoint of capacity and reliability of operation for the 
service in which it is employed; 
(3) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, set to control or relieve at 
the correct pressure consistent with the pressure limits of § 192.201(a); and 
(4) Properly installed and protected from dirt, liquids, or other conditions that 
might prevent proper operation. 

NSB failed to inspect and test its pressure relief devices at least once a calendar year, at intervals 
not exceeding 15 months, as required. Specifically, NSB failed to produce clear and accurate 
inspection and testing records for pressure-relief device PSV No.62252A. Annual inspection and 
testing records for PSV No.62252A did not have consistent identification number, and serial 
number between 2020 and 2021. 

A review of NSB’s recordsj showed a PSV inspection on June 25, 2020, was completed on PSV 
No. 62252A, serial number 04-05039. The following yeark, on July 24, 2021, the same valve was 
tested as PSV No. 6225A with serial number 01/05039. PSV tag numbers and serial numbers did 
not match between the years 2020 and 2021 for the same PSV. The valve was believed to be the 
same because the operator stated that the valve had not been exchanged or replaced, the valve 
was observed to be in the same general location, and records also did not indicate a new valve 
was installed. 

i Exhibit J-1, Manufacturer’s manual for DTEX DX-1000G 
j Exhibit F-1, PSV testing record, page 5 of 5 
k Exhibit F-1, PSV testing record, page 4 of 5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Therefore, NSB failed to properly document inspection and testing of pressure relief device PSV 
number 62252A as required. 

7. 

§ 192.805  Qualification program. 

Each operator shall have and follow a written qualification program. 

The NSB failed to follow its written qualification program. Specifically, its Operator Qualification 
Plan  (OQ  Plan)  Manuall  stated,  "The  Program  Manager  or  Designee  will  annually  review,  at 
intervals not to exceed 15 months but at least once each calendar year, the OQ Qualification Plan, 
considering  the  above  items."  The  review  and  revision  log within  the  OQ  Plan  manual  had  no 
documented revision since 2019. 

Therefore, NSB failed to follow its written qualification program per § 192.805. 

8. 

§ 192.1007  What are the required elements of an integrity management plan? 

A written integrity management plan must contain procedures for developing and 
implementing the following elements: 
(a) … 
(f) Periodic Evaluation and Improvement.  An operator must re-evaluate threats and 
risks on its entire pipeline and consider the relevance of threats in one location to 
other areas. Each operator must determine the appropriate period for conducting 
complete program evaluations based on the complexity of its system and changes in 
factors affecting the risk of failure. An operator must conduct a complete program 
re-evaluation at least every five years. The operator must consider the results of the 
performance monitoring in these evaluations. 

NSB failed to conduct a complete program re-evaluation at least every five years as required. 
Specifically, NSB failed to implement a periodic evaluation and improvements review within its 
Distribution Integrity Management Plan (DIMP)m. During inspection, NSB could not produce 
any evidence demonstrating that evaluations were implemented into the DIMP. The DIMP had 
no revisions or updates since 2014. 

The DIMP stated "At least once per calendar year, at intervals not to exceed 15 months, the NSB 
Department of Public Works shall review this program for consistency with 49 CFR §192 
Subpart P and necessary updates to system and threat information."  The operator could not 
provide evidence to demonstrate that the DIMP manual had been reviewed or updated since 
2014. 

Therefore, NSB failed to conduct a complete program re-evaluation of its DIMP at least every 
five years as required. 

l Exhibit A-6, Operator Qualification Plan (OQ Plan) Manual, Section 1.6 OQ Process Review, Continuous 
Improvement, and Updates, page 13 of 419 
m Exhibit A-2, Gas Distribution Integrity Management Plan (DIMP) Manual, Section 3.6, Annual Review, page 8 of 
42 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
Proposed Civil Penalty 
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a 
related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before 
January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the 
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after May 3, 2021 and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before 
May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation 
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before 
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a 
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679.  For violation occurring on or after November 2, 
2015 and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per 
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022. 

We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved in this case, and have 
decided not to propose a civil penalty assessment at this time. 

Proposed Compliance Order 
With respect to Items 1 through 5 and 7 through 8 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline 
and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to North 
Slope Borough Energy Management.  Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is 
enclosed and made a part of this Notice. 

Warning Item(s) 
With respect to Item 6, we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved 
in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action or penalty assessment 
proceedings at this time.  We advise you to promptly correct these item(s).  Failure to do so may 
result in additional enforcement action. 

Response to this Notice 
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators 
in Enforcement Proceedings.  Please refer to this document and note the response options.  All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available.  If 
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment 
under 5 U.S.C. §552(b), along with the complete original document, you must provide a second 
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted 
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential 
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  The Region 
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted 
demonstrating good cause for an extension. 

In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 5-2023-039-NOPV, and for each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

Sincerely, 

Dustin Hubbard, 
Director, Western Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

cc: 

PHP-60 Compliance Registry 
PHP-500 M. Yeager (#22-254201) 
Roy Martinez, Nuiqsut Gas Distribution Manager, NSBmanager@nucmail.com 
Joanne Simmonds, Assistant to the Mayor Joanne.simmonds@north-slope.org 
Charlie Risley, NSB Gas Field Manager Charlie.risley@north-slope.org 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to North Slope Borough Energy Management a 
Compliance Order incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance
of North Slope Borough Energy Management (NSB) with the pipeline safety regulations: 

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

E. 

In regard to Item 1 of the Notice pertaining to NSB not following their operations 
and maintenance (O&M) manual regarding altering the pipeline monitoring 
system without deploying a management of change (MOC) process, NSB must 
conduct a Management of Change in accordance with their own procedure for the 
prior pipeline monitoring system change within 30 days of receipt of the Final 
Order and must provide written notice (including documentation) to the Director 
of the Western Region within 10 business days of completing this task. 

In regard to Item 2 of the Notice pertaining to updating operations and 
maintenance manuals within the required time intervals, NSB must update, 
review, and document updates and the review of their O&M manual and their 
Pipeline-Specific Operations & Maintenance (PSOM) manual within 90 days of 
receipt of the Final Order and must provide written notice (including 
documentation) to the Director of the Western Region within 10 business days of 
completing this task. 

In regard to Item 3 of the Notice pertaining to periodic review of the effectiveness 
and adequacy of the operations and maintenance manuals, NSB must conduct 
reviews for effectiveness and adequacy of their O&M manual and their Pipeline-
Specific Operations & Maintenance (PSOM) manual within 180 days of receipt of 
the Final Order and must provide written notice (including documentation) to the 
Director of the Western Region within 10 business days of completing this task. 

In regard to Item 4 of the Notice pertaining to equipment for emergency response, 
NSB must provide written notice (including documentation) demonstrating their 
field personnel have access to the emergency response equipment as required in 
its Emergency Response Plan within 90 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item 5 of the Notice pertaining sampling of combustible gases, NSB 
must document odorant sampling with properly calibrated equipment, and 
documented with objective numerical values with units ensuring proper 
concentration of odorant within the distribution system, within 270 days of receipt 
of the Final Order and must provide written notice (including documentation) to 
the Director of the Western Region within 10 business days of completing this 
task. 

F. 

In regard to Item 7 of the Notice pertaining to the OQ manual, NSB must update 
their OQ manual within 180 days of receipt of the Final Order and must provide 
written notice (including documentation) to the Director of the Western Region 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
within 10 business days of completing this task. 

G. 

H. 

In regard to Item 8 of the Notice pertaining to reevaluation of its Distribution 
Integrity Management Plan (DIMP), NSB must conduct evaluations and 
implement appropriate findings into their DIMP manual within 180 days of 
receipt of the Final Order and must provide written notice (including 
documentation) to the Director of the Western Region within 10 business days of 
completing this task. 

It is requested (not mandated) that NSB maintain documentation of the safety 
improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit 
the total to Dustin Hubbard, Director, Western Region, Pipeline and Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration.  It is requested that these costs be reported in 
two categories: 1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of plans, 
procedures, studies and, analyses, and 2) total cost associated with replacements, 
additions, and other changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
