NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA E-MAIL TO MR. DAX SANDERS 

April 17, 2023 

Mr. Dax Sanders 
President, Products Pipelines 
Kinder Morgan 
1001 Louisiana St., Suite 1000 
Houston, TX 77002 

Dear Mr. Sanders: 

CPF 5-2023-030-NOPV 

From October 25, 2022 through October 28, 2022, a representative of the Arizona Corporation 
Commission, Office of Pipeline Safety (AZOPS), on behalf of the Pipeline and Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 
601 of 49 United States Code (U.S.C.), inspected SFPP LP pipeline systems from Phoenix, 
Arizona to the New Mexico state line, as well as the terminal in Phoenix, Arizona.1 

As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that you have committed a probable violation of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The item inspected 
and the probable violation is: 

1 SFPP, LP is a subsidiary of Kinder Morgan, Inc. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
1. 

§ 195.402  Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a)  Each operator shall prepare and follow for each pipeline system a manual of 
written procedures for conducting normal operations and maintenance activities 
and handling abnormal operations and emergencies. This manual shall be reviewed 
at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar year, and 
appropriate changes made as necessary to insure that the manual is effective. This 
manual shall be prepared before initial operations of a pipeline system commence, 
and appropriate parts shall be kept at locations where operations and maintenance 
activities are conducted. 

SFPP failed to follow its procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies L-
O&M 1403 (O&M), Specifications – Flanges, Flange Bolts & Gaskets, Section 3.6.2, which 
required that two nuts be completely engaged on a threaded bolt (stud) and that the bolt threads 
extend a minimum of 1.5 threads past the nut.2  At the time of the inspection, AZOPS, acting as 
an agent of PHMSA, observed and photographed flange joints at the inlet of jurisdictional tank 
T2 A-1 and T5 A-1 at the Tucson terminal, which had nuts that were not fully engaged with the 
threads, and the bolt threads did not extend a minimum of 1.5 threads past the nut pursuant to 
SFPP’s written procedures.3 

Proposed Compliance Order 

With respect to item 1 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to SFPP, LP.  Please refer to the 
Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this Notice. 

Response to this Notice 

Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators 
in Enforcement Proceedings.  Please refer to this document and note the response options.  All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available.  If 
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment 
under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second 
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted 
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential 
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  The Region 

2 See Pipeline Safety Violation Report (Violation Report) at Exhibit A. 

3 See Violation Report at Exhibits B and C. 

 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
 
 
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted 
demonstrating good cause for an extension. 

In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 5-2023-030-NOPV and, for each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

Sincerely, 

Dustin Hubbard 
Director, Western Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

cc: 

PHP-60 Compliance Registry 
Eric Villa, Program Manager, Arizona Corporation Commission, Office of Pipeline 
Safety 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to SFPP, LP a Compliance Order incorporating the 
following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of SFPP, LP with the pipeline safety 
regulations: 

A. 

In regard to Item 1 of the Notice pertaining to not following its written procedures 
for conducting normal operations and maintenance activities and handling 
abnormal operations and emergencies, SFPP must follow L -O&M 1403, 
Specifications – Flanges, Flange Bolts & Gaskets and install stud bolts of the 
same length to the flange where different lengths of stud bolts were used within 
90 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

B.  Within 90 days of the receipt of the Final Order, SFPP must submit 

documentation and records to PHMSA to demonstrate completion of item A 
above. 

C. 

It is requested (not mandated) that SFPP, LP maintain documentation of the safety 
improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit 
the total to Dustin Hubbard, Director, Western Region, Pipeline and Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration.  It is requested that these costs be reported in 
two categories: 1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of plans, 
procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with replacements, 
additions and other changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
