NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: Ellen.mcelrath@contango.com 

October 25, 2023 

Ms. Ellen McElrath 
Vice President – Rockies 
Contango Resources 
1717 South Boulder, Suite 900 
Tulsa, OK 74119 

Dear Ms. McElrath: 

CPF 5-2023-035-NOPV 

From July 25 through July 29, 2022, a representative of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 
United States Code (U.S.C.), inspected your control room procedures and records of Contango 
Resources (Contango) in Midwest, Wyoming. 

As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that you have committed probable violations of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).  The items inspected   
and the probable violations are: 

1. 

§ 195.446 Control room management. 

(a) … 
(c) Provide adequate information.  Each operator must provide its controllers with 
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each 
of the following: 
(1)  … 
(3)  Test and verify an internal communication plan to provide adequate means for 
manual operation of the pipeline safely, at least once each calendar year, but at 
intervals not to exceed 15 months; … 

Contango failed to test and verify its internal communication plan as required.  Specifically, 
the Contango Environment, Health & Safety DOT CO2 Pipeline Control Room Management 
Plan section 5.3 states that tabletop drills will be the primary method for testing the internal 
communications plan.  Tabletop drills do not test the ability of Contango staff to communicate 
with the control room from pipeline right-of-way locations, which would be required for 
manual operation of the pipeline.  This is because manual operation of a pipeline requires 
operator personnel to be physically located at predetermined points along the right-of-way so 
they can communicate with the control room staff and provide pipeline operations data.  
Additionally, the plan fails to provide detail as to when the staff will deploy to the pipeline 
right-of-way, and how staff will communicate with each other and the control room.  Further, 
the plan fails to provide instructions for documenting the test results to verify that the plan 
provides adequate means for manual operation of the pipeline safely. 

Therefore, Contango failed to test and verify its internal communication plan to provide 
adequate means for manual operation of the pipeline safely, per § 195.446(c)(3). 

2. 

§ 195.446 Control room management. 

(a)  … 
(c)  Provide adequate information. Each operator must provide its controllers with 
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to 
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each 
of the following: 
(1)  … 
(4)  Test any backup SCADA systems at least once each calendar year, but at 
intervals not to exceed 15 months; … 

Contango failed to test its backup SCADA systems at least once each calendar year, but at 
intervals not to exceed 15 months as required.  Specifically, during the inspection, a review of 
Contango’s procedures revealed Contango did not have a procedure to test backup SCADA 
systems.  Further, Contango could not provide any records that it had tested its backup SCADA 
systems. 

Therefore, Contango failed to test any backup SCADA systems at least once a calendar year as 
required pursuant to § 195.446(c)(4). 

3. 

§ 195.446 Control room management. 

(a)  … 

 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
(e)  Alarm management. Each operator using a SCADA system must have a written 
alarm management plan to provide for effective controller response to alarms. An 
operator's plan must include provisions to: 
(1) … 
(5) Monitor the content and volume of general activity being directed to and 
required of each controller at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not 
exceeding 15 months, that will assure controllers have sufficient time to analyze and 
react to incoming alarms; … 

Contango failed to monitor the content and volume of general activity being directed to and 
required of each controller at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not exceeding 15 
months, that will assure controllers have sufficient time to analyze and react to incoming alarms. 
Specifically, during inspection, Contango could not provide any records that demonstrated it 
monitored the content and volume of general activity being directed to and required of each 
controller at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not exceeding 15 months, in order to 
verify controllers have sufficient time to analyze and react to incoming alarms. 

Therefore, Contango failed to monitor the content and volume of general activity being directed 
to and required by each controller as required per § 195.446(e)(5). 

Proposed Civil Penalty 

Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a 
related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before 
January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the 
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after May 3, 2021 and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before 
May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation 
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before 
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a 
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679.  For violation occurring on or after November 2, 
2015 and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per 
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022. 

We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved in this case, and have 
decided not to propose a civil penalty assessment at this time. 

Proposed Compliance Order 
With respect to items 1, 2 and 3 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Contango Resources.  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this 
Notice. 

Response to this Notice 

Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators 
in Enforcement Proceedings.  Please refer to this document and note the response options.  All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available.  If 
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment 
under 5 U.S.C. §552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second 
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted 
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential 
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  The Region 
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted 
demonstrating good cause for an extension. 

In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 5-2023-035-NOPV and, for each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

Sincerely, 

Dustin Hubbard 
Director, Western Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

cc: 

PHP-60 Compliance Registry 
PHP-500 J. Dunphy (#22-239214) 
Caleb Dill, Supervisor, Operations – Caleb.Dill@contango.com 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to Contango Resources a Compliance Order
incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of Contango 
Resources (Contango) with the pipeline safety regulations: 

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

In regard to Item 1 of the Notice pertaining to Contango’s failure to test and
verify the internal communications plan at least once each calendar year, but at
intervals not to exceed 15 months.  Contango Resources must amend its 
procedures to provide for the dispatching of pipeline staff to sites along the
pipeline to test and verify the internal communications plan and the ability of staff
to communicate with the control room from the field locations.  Contango must 
amend the internal communications plan, conduct a test of the internal
communications plan using the amended procedures and submit both the amended 
procedures and documentation of the test to PHMSA within 60 days of receipt of 
the Final Order. 

In regard to Item 2 of the Notice pertaining to Contango’s failure to test any 
backup SCADA systems at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not to
exceed 15 months.  Contango must amend its procedures to provide detailed 
instructions for the testing of each backup SCADA system and documenting each 
test.  Contango must test each backup SCADA system using the amended 
procedures and submit both the amended procedures and documentation of each 
test to PHMSA within 60 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item 3 of the Notice pertaining to Contango’s failure to monitor the
content and volume of general activity being directed to and required of each 
controller.  Contango must amend its procedures to provide detailed instructions
for reviewing and documenting the analysis of the content and volume of general
activity being directed to and required of each controller that will assure
controllers have sufficient time to analyze and react to incoming alarms.
Contango shall conduct a review and analysis of the content and volume of
general activity being directed to and required of each controller using the
amended procedures and submit both the amended procedures and documentation 
of the review and analysis to PHMSA within 60 days of receipt of the Final 
Order. 

It  is requested (not mandated) that Contango maintain documentation of the
safety improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and
submit the total to Dustin Hubbard, Director, Western Region, Pipeline and 
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration.  It is requested that these costs be 
reported in two categories: 1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of
plans, procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with
replacements, additions and other changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
