NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: mhepburn@parpacific.com 

October 25, 2023 

Mr. Mark Hepburn 
Vice President 
Par Hawaii Logistics 
91-325 Komohana Street 
Kapolei, HI 96707 

Dear Mr. Hepburn: 

CPF 5-2023-043-NOPV 

From August 22 through 26, 2022, a representative of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration (PHMSA), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 United States Code (U.S.C.), 
inspected the PAR Hawaii Refining, LLC (PAR) control room procedures and records for the 
Kapolei control room in Kapolei, Hawaii. 

As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that you have committed probable violations of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).  The items inspected 
and the probable violations are: 

1. 

§195.446  Control room management. 

(a) General. This section applies to each operator of a pipeline facility with a 
controller working in a control room who monitors and controls all or part of a 
pipeline facility through a SCADA system. Each operator must have and follow 
written control room management procedures that implement the requirements of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
this section. The procedures required by this section must be integrated, as 
appropriate, with the operator's written procedures required by § 195.402… 

PAR failed to follow its written control room management procedures (CRMP) implementing 
the requirements of § 195.446(e)(5) as required. Specifically, PAR failed to follow CRMP 
Section 5.4 Workload Analysis for monitoring controller activity1. The procedure required PAR 
to observe the actions of each controller at least once each calendar year. However, PAR could 
not provide any records to demonstrate that PAR monitor the content and volume of general 
activity being directed to and required of each controller at least once each calendar year, but at 
intervals not exceeding 15 months, that will assure controllers have sufficient time to analyze 
and react to incoming alarms.2 

Therefore, PAR failed to follow its written procedures as required pursuant to § 195.446(a). 

2. 

§195.446  Control room management. 

(a) . . . 
(c) Provide adequate information. Each operator must provide its controllers with 
the information, tools, processes, and procedures necessary for the controllers to 
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each 
of the following: 
(1) . . . 
(2) Conduct a point-to-point verification between SCADA displays and related field 
equipment when field equipment is added or moved and when other changes that 
affect pipeline safety are made to field equipment or SCADA displays; 

PAR failed to conduct a point-to-point verification between SCADA displays and related field 
equipment when field equipment is added or moved and when other changes that affect pipeline 
safety are made to field equipment. Specifically, during inspection, it was noted that PAR 
installed a new MOV kicker valve as shown in its MOC# M2018249-001. However, PAR could 
not provide any records to demonstrate that a point-to-point verification had been conducted 
between the field and the control room after the MOV kicker valve was installed.3 

Therefore, PAR failed to conduct a point-to-point verification as required per § 195.446(c)(2). 

3. 

§195.446  Control room management. 

(a) . . . 
(c) Provide adequate information. Each operator must provide its controllers with 
the information, tools, processes, and procedures necessary for the controllers to 
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each 
of the following: 
(1) . . . 

1 See Control Room Management Plan, pg. 33. 
2 See Post Inspection Program Updates, pg. 8. 
3 See Post Inspection Program Updates, pg. 5. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) Test and verify an internal communication plan to provide adequate means for 
manual operation of the pipeline safely, at least once each calendar year, but at 
intervals not to exceed 15 months; 

PAR failed to test and verify an internal communication plan to provide adequate means for 
manual operation of the pipeline safely, at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not to 
exceed 15 months.  During the inspection, PAR could not produce any records to demonstrate it 
had tested and verified its communication plan on an annual basis.4 

Therefore, PAR failed to test and verify its internal communication plan at least once a calendar 
year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months as required pursuant to § 195.446(c)(3). 

4. 

§195.446  Control room management. 

(a) . . . 
(c) Provide adequate information. Each operator must provide its controllers with 
the information, tools, processes, and procedures necessary for the controllers to 
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each 
of the following: 
(1) . . . 
(4) Test any backup SCADA systems at least once each calendar year, but at 
intervals not to exceed 15 months; 

PAR failed to test any backup SCADA systems at least once each calendar year, but at intervals 
not to exceed 15 months. During PHMSA inspection, PAR could not provide any records to 
demonstrate  its backup SCADA systems had been tested in the calendar years of 2019, 2020 and 
2021.5 

Therefore, PAR failed to test its backup SCADA systems at least once each calendar year, but at 
intervals not to exceed 15 months as required. 

5. 

§195.446  Control room management. 

(a) . . . 
(h) Training. Each operator must establish a controller training program and review 
the training program content to identify potential improvements at least once each 
calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months. An operator's program 
must provide for training each controller to carry out the roles and responsibilities 
defined by the operator. In addition, the training program must include the 
following elements: 
(1) … 

4 See Post Inspection Program Updates, pg. 6. 
5 See Post Inspection Program Updates, pg. 7. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
(6) Control room team training and exercises that include both controllers and other 
individuals, defined by the operator, who would reasonably be expected to 
operationally collaborate with controllers (control room personnel) during normal, 
abnormal or emergency situations. Operators must comply with the team training 
requirements under this paragraph no later than January 23, 2018. 

PAR failed to provide for training each controller to carry out the roles and responsibilities 
defined by the operator as required. Specifically, during the PHMSA inspection, PAR could not 
provide any records  demonstrating it had conducted team training and exercises once each 
calendar year, at intervals not to exceed 15 months, that included both controllers and other 
individuals who would reasonably expect to operationally collaborate with controllers during 
normal, abnormal or emergency situations.6 

Therefore, PAR failed to conduct control room team training and exercises once each calendar 
year, at intervals not to exceed 15 months, as required by § 195.446(h)(6). 

6. 

§195.446  Control room management. 

(a) . . . . 
(j) Compliance and deviations. An operator must maintain for review during 
inspection: 
(1) Records that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section; … 

PAR failed to provide records to demonstrate that it was in compliance with § 195.446(c)(1). 
Specifically, § 195.446(c)(1) requires an operator to implement API RP 1165 whenever a 
SCADA system is added, expanded or replaced, unless the operator demonstrates that certain 
provisions of API RP 1165 are not practical for the SCADA system used. At the time of PHMSA 
inspection, PAR mentioned that they integrated the Atmos Leak Detection system into its 
SCADA system in 2013.  However, PAR could not provide any records and or analysis that API 
RP 1165 has been followed during the integration or any justification that API RP 1165 is not 
practical for the SCADA system used. 7 

Proposed Civil Penalty 

Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a 
related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before 
January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the 
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after May 3, 2021 and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before 
May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation 
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations.  For violation 

6 See Post Inspection Program Updates, pg. 10. 
7 See Post Inspection Program Updates, pg. 3. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before 
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a 
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679.  For violation occurring on or after November 2, 
2015 and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per 
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022.  

We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved in this case, and have 
decided not to propose a civil penalty assessment at this time.  

Proposed Compliance Order 
With respect to items 3, 5, and 6 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to PAR Hawaii Refining, 
LLC.  Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this 
Notice. 

Warning Items 

With respect to items 1, 2, and 4, we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents 
involved in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action or penalty 
assessment proceedings at this time.  We advise you to promptly correct these items.  Failure to 
do so may result in additional enforcement action. 

Response to this Notice 

Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators 
in Enforcement Proceedings.  Please refer to this document and note the response options.  All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available.  If 
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment 
under 5 U.S.C. §552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second 
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted 
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential 
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  The Region 
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted 
demonstrating good cause for an extension. 

In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 5-2023-043-NOPV and, for each 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

Sincerely, 

Dustin Hubbard 
Director, Western Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

cc: 

PHP-60 Compliance Registry 
PHP-500 J. Dunphy (#22-239216) 
Michelle Loveless, Compliance Coordinator, Logistics, MLoveless@parpacific.com 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 
(PHMSA) proposes to issue to PAR Hawaii Refining, LLC a Compliance Order incorporating 
the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of PAR Hawaii Refining, LLC
with the pipeline safety regulations: 

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

In regard to Item 3 of the Notice pertaining to PAR’s failure to test and verify an 
internal communication plan to provide adequate means for manual operation of 
the pipeline safely, at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 
15 months, PAR must conduct a test of its internal communications plan and 
submit the results of this test to PHMSA within 60 days of receipt of the Final 
Order. 

In regard to Item 5 of the Notice pertaining to PAR’s failure to provide for 
training each controller to carry out the roles and responsibilities defined by the 
operator as required, PAR must train their controllers with their new procedure to 
require conducting a team training and exercises once each calendar year, at 
intervals not to exceed 15 months, that included both controllers and other 
individuals who would reasonably expect to operationally collaborate with 
controllers during normal, abnormal or emergency situations and train their 
controllers with this new procedure. PAR must submit records of training to 
PHMSA within 60 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item 6 of the Notice pertaining to PAR’s failure to document that the 
new Atmos SCADA screens were in compliance with API RP 1165, PAR must 
conduct analysis of its Atmos leak detection SCADA screens for compliance with 
API RP 1165 and submit this analysis to PHMSA within 30 days of receipt of the 
Final Order. 

It is requested (not mandated) that PAR Hawaii Refining, LLC maintain 
documentation of the safety improvement costs associated with fulfilling this 
Compliance Order and submit the total to Dustin Hubbard, Director, Western 
Region, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration.  It is requested 
that these costs be reported in two categories: 1) total cost associated with 
preparation/revision of plans, procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost 
associated with replacements, additions and other changes to pipeline 
infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
