NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL 

March 24, 2023 

Raymond Latchem - ray@norgasco.com 
President 
Norgasco, Inc 
4341 B Street Suite 306 
Anchorage, AK 

Dear Mr. Latchem, 

CPF: 5-2023-016-NOPV 

From May 7 through May 11, 2022, and September 27 through September 30, 2022, a 
representative from the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), 
Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 United States Code (U.S.C.) 
inspected Norgasco Inc.’s (Norgasco or Operator) natural gas distribution system in Deadhorse, 
Alaska. 

As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that you have committed probable violations of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).  The items inspected 
and the probable violations are: 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. 

§ 192.285    Plastic pipe: Qualifying persons to make joints. 
(a)  No person may make a plastic pipe joint unless that person has been qualified 
under the applicable joining procedure by: 
(1) Appropriate training or experience in the use of the procedure; and 
(2) Making a specimen joint from pipe sections joined according to the procedure 
that passes the inspection and test set forth in paragraph (b) of this section. 

During the summer of 2020, a Norgasco employee (2020 summer intern) made multiple plastic 
pipe joints on a main-line distribution pipes without being qualified. This was also a violation of 
Norgasco Operating and Maintenance Procedure P-20, Procedure P-21 and O&M §5-A. 

Multiple Norgasco personnel made verbal statements to PHMSA inspectors that their 2020 
summer-intern made the plastic pipe joints.  The employee’s name wasn't on any of the 
construction documents, and the Operator did not have qualification records for the employee. 
Operator personnel indicated that the employee had joined pipe on the 2020 Sag Road 
Distribution Line and 2020 Spine Road Distribution Line installation projects, but the employee 
was not listed as an employee who joined pipe in any of the construction records. 

2. 

§ 192.513    Test requirements for plastic pipelines. 
(a)  . . . . 
(c)  The test pressure must be at least 150% of the maximum operating pressure or 
50 psi (345 kPa) gauge, whichever is greater. However, the maximum test pressure 
may not be more than 2.5 times the pressure determined under §192.121 at a 
temperature not less than the pipe temperature during the test. 

During the installation of three service lines, Norgasco pressure tested the relocated service lines 
and the fittings that were electro-fused to the mains, to the operating pressure (70 psig), not to 
the required test pressure (140 psig). The following construction records of Norgasco work 
orders and pressure test reports were reviewed:(1) Sag River Road & Stallion pad dated ”Fall 
2020”; (2) Sag River Road & Worley AOH pad dated “Fall 2020”; and (3) Pathfinder Hanger 
131 Carlile Pad on 8/13/2018.  Each of these records showed that the Operator pressure tested 
new distribution piping to 70 psig instead of to 140 psig, as required by § 192.513(c), and the 
Operator’s P-38 Pressure Testing Distribution Mains and Service Lines procedure. 

The Operator verbally stated to PHMSA inspectors that they only tested pipe to 70 psig because 
they did not want to take the risk of blowing off an electro-fusion fitting on an operating line. 
Norgasco’s distribution system MAOP is 90 psi and newly installed plastic pipe must be pressure 
tested to 140 psi per the Norgasco O&M Manual and Pressure Test Procedure P-38. The 
regulatory requirement is 135 psig (1.5 times 90 psi). 

3. 

§ 192.625    Odorization of gas. 
(a)  A combustible gas in a distribution line must contain a natural odorant or be 
odorized so that at a concentration in air of one-fifth of the lower explosive limit, the 
gas is readily detectable by a person with a normal sense of smell. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The Operator failed to odorize the distribution line between Skid 1 (located approximately two 
miles North of Deadhorse) and Skid 2 (in Deadhorse, AK).  This line is operated at higher 
pressures than the rest of the distribution system, with operating pressures of 450-480 psi, and an 
MAOP of 740 psi, which is 16% SMYS.  Norgasco currently odorizes gas for their distribution 
system at Skid 2. 

4. 

§ 192.625    Odorization of gas. 
(a)  . . . . 
(f)  To assure the proper concentration of odorant in accordance with this section, 
each operator must conduct periodic sampling of combustible gases using an 
instrument capable of determining the percentage of gas in air at which the odor 
becomes readily detectable. Operators of master meter systems may comply with 
this requirement by- 
(1) Receiving written verification from their gas source that the gas has the proper 
concentration of odorant; and 
(2) Conducting periodic "sniff" tests at the extremities of the system to confirm that 
the gas contains odorant. 

Norgasco failed to follow the manufacturer’s instructions while using the Heath Consultants 
Odorator Model #1, resulting in an inaccurate odorant level reading. During an odorant test 
observed by PHMSA inspectors, the Operator did not remove the Heath Consultants Odorator 
from the carrying case while conducting the test. The carrying case, with foam interior padding, 
was not supplied by the manufacturer and was used by the Operator to protect the instrument 
from fall damage and to keep it from freezing (loss of display and battery) during cold weather. 
The user manual for the odorator used, Heath Consultants Odorator Model #1, page IV states: 
“WARNING: ... DO NOT OBSTRUCT OR BLOCK THE INTAKE OR EXHAUST PORT.” A 
PHMSA inspector contacted the manufacturer and confirmed that the odorator should be 
removed from the case and used per manufacturer’s instruction to ensure accuracy of the odorant 
level readings.  The manufacturer representative stated in an email to a PHMSA inspector that 
the Operator’s practice of leaving the odorator in the carrying case could have resulted in an 
inaccurate odorant reading. 

§ 192.743    Pressure limiting and regulating stations: Capacity of relief devices. 

5. 
(a)  Pressure relief devices at pressure limiting stations and pressure regulating stations 
must have sufficient capacity to protect the facilities to which they are connected. Except as 
provided in § 192.739(b), the capacity must be consistent with the pressure limits of § 
192.201(a).  This capacity must be determined at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at 
least once each calendar year, by testing the devices in place or by review and calculations. 

Norgasco failed to conduct a review of it pressure relief device capacities for the pressure safety 
valves at Skid 1 and Skid 2 each calendar year, at intervals not exceeding 15 months. The 
Operator was unable to provide pressure safety valve (PSV) capacity calculations for the 
pressure safety valves at the Skid 1 and Skid 2 regulating stations upon request. 

 
 
 
 
 
6. 

§ 192.807    Recordkeeping. 
Each operator shall maintain records that demonstrate compliance with this 
subpart. 
(a)  Qualification records shall include: 
(1)  Identification of qualified individual(s); 
(2)  Identification of the covered tasks the individual is qualified to perform; 
(3)  Date(s) of current qualification; and 
(4)  Qualification method(s). 

Norgasco did not have a qualification records for each operator qualified (OQ) employee that 
evidenced compliance with the regulation. The existing training records did not document the 
qualification method (e.g. exam). 

Proposed Compliance Order 

Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a 
related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before 
January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the 
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after May 3, 2021 and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before 
May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation 
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before 
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a 
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679.  For violation occurring on or after November 2, 
2015 and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per 
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022. 

We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved in this case, and have 
decided not to propose a civil penalty assessment at this time. 

With respect to items 2, 3, 4, 5 & 6 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous 
Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Norgasco Inc.  Please 
refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this Notice. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Warning Item(s) 

With respect to item 1, we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved 
in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action or penalty assessment 
proceedings at this time.  We advise you to promptly correct this item.  Failure to do so may 
result in additional enforcement action. 

Response to this Notice 

Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators 
in Enforcement Proceedings.  Please refer to this document and note the response options.  Be 
advised that all material you submit in response to this enforcement action is subject to being 
made publicly available.  If you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for 
confidential treatment under 5 U.S.C. 552(b), along with the complete original document you 
must provide a second copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for 
confidential treatment redacted and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information 
qualifies for confidential treatment under 5 U.S.C. 552(b). 

Following the receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to submit written comments, or request a 
hearing under 49 CFR § 190.211.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, 
this constitutes a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the 
Associate Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further 
notice to you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that 
you submit your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  This 
period may be extended by written request for good cause. 

In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 5-2023-016-NOPV, and for each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

Sincerely, 

DUSTIN B 
HUBBARD 

Digitally signed by 
DUSTIN B HUBBARD 
Date: 2023.03.24 
07:46:17  -06'00' 

Dustin Hubbard 
Director, Western Region 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

Cc. 

Chris Lyon, PHMSA (21-207466) 
Bret Bartholomy, Norgasco, DOT Compliance Primary, bret@norgasco.com 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 
(PHMSA) proposes to issue to Norgasco Inc.  a Compliance Order incorporating the following 
remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of Norgasco Inc.  with the pipeline safety 
regulations: 

A. 

In regard to Item Number 2 of the Notice pertaining to failure to fully pressure 
test newly electro-fusion hot-tapped fittings and associated service lines, 
Norgasco Inc, must complete the following within 365 days of receipt of the Final 
Order. 

a.  Pressure test to 140 psig the three hot-tapped three electrofusion fittings that 
were only pressure tested to 70 psig, at Sag River Road & Stalion Pad, Sag 
River Road & Worley AOH Pad and Pathfinder hanger 131 Carlile Pad. 
This test may require removal and replacement of the electro-fusion fittings. 

b.  Pressure test the three service lines associated with these three pads to 140 

psig. 

c.  Provide notice to PHMSA inspector Chris Lyon via email at 

christopher.lyon@dot.gov, 30 days prior to the test. 

d.  Document completion of the tasks above and submit to the PHMSA Western 

Regional Director. 

B. 

C. 

In regard to Item Number 3 of the Notice pertaining to failure to odorize the 
distribution line between the Hilcorp Tie-in and Skid 2, Norgasco Inc. must 
complete the following within 120 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

a.  Submit a compliance plan to the PHMSA Western Regional Director for 

review and approval. 

In regard to Item Number 4 of the Notice pertaining to proper use of the Odorator, 
Norgasco Inc. must complete the following within 30 days of receipt of the Final 
Order. 

a.  Install a label on the Odorator carrying case requiring removal of equipment 

from the case during use. 

b.  Conduct an updated training class for all Operator personnel qualified to 

operate the Odorator to ensure they are properly trained to conduct Odorant 
testing per the manufacturer’s recommendations. 

c.  Revise the Norgasco Operations and Maintenance Procedure for odorant 

testing to include requirement that the odorant meter to be removed from its 
carrying case during testing. 

d.  Document completion of the tasks above and submit to the PHMSA Western 

Regional Director. 

D. 

In regard to Item Number 5 of the Notice pertaining to lack of pressure safety 
valve (PSV) relief calculations, Norgasco Inc. must complete the following within 
120 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

a.  Submit documentation to the PHMSA Western Regional Director 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
demonstrating Norgasco’s pressure relief devices at pressure limiting stations 
and pressure regulating stations have sufficient capacity to protect the 
facilities to which they are connected. 

E. 

In regard to Item Number 6 of the Notice pertaining to lack of Operator employee 
Qualification records, Norgasco Inc. must complete the following within 120 days 
of receipt of the Final Order. 

a.  Submit revised procedure(s), with data collection forms, that demonstrate full 

documentation of the operator qualified (OQ) training of each covered 
employee to the PHMSA Western Regional Director. 

It is requested that Norgasco Inc. maintain documentation of the safety improvement costs 
associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit the total to Dustin Hubbard, 
Director, Western Region, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration.  It is 
requested that these costs be reported in two categories: 1) total cost associated with 
preparation/revision of plans, procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with 
replacements, additions and other changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
