NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
PROPOSED CIVIL PENALTY 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: kelleherk@ugicorp.com 

June 22, 2023 

Mr. Kevin Kelleher 
Vice President, Operations 
AmeriGas Propane LP 
460 N. Gulph Rd. 
King of Prussia, PA 19406 

Dear Mr. Kelleher: 

CPF 5-2023-029-NOPV 

From November 7 through 17, 2022 of the on-site inspection, a representative of the Pipeline and 
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant 
to Chapter 601 of 49 United States Code (U.S.C.), inspected your liquified petroleum gas 
distribution systems in Maui, Oahu, and the Island of Hawaii, Hawaii. 

As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that you have committed probable violations of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).  The items inspected 
and the probable violations are: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1. 

§ 192.195 Protection against accidental overpressuring. 

(a) General requirements.  Except as provided in § 192.197, each pipeline that is 
connected to a gas source so that the maximum allowable operating pressure could be 
exceeded as the result of pressure control failure or of some other type of failure, must 
have pressure relieving or pressure limiting devices that meet the requirements of §§ 
192.199 and 192.201. 

AmeriGas failed to protect a customer gas meter on the “AAAAA Rent-A-Space” (Maui) system 
from over-pressuring.  Photos taken during the November 2022 on-site inspection show that one 
of the three customer service meters (specifically the meter labeled “IA Ohana Taco”) lacked 
adequate pressure limiting devices to regulate the pressure to less than the meter’s maximum 
allowable operating pressure (MAOP).  The customer meter was operated at the pipeline 
pressure (approximately 8 psi at the time of inspection), which is greater than the 5 psi MAOP 
that was clearly indicated on the meter’s nameplate. 

2. 

§ 192.355 Customer meters and regulators: Protection from damage. 

(a)  . . . . 
(b) Service regulator vents and relief vents.  Service regulator vents and relief vents 
must terminate outdoors, and the outdoor terminal must – 
(1) . . . . 
(2) Be located at a place where gas from the vent can escape freely into the 
atmosphere and away from any opening into the building; 

AmeriGas failed to install service regulator vents at locations where gas from the vent can escape 
freely into the atmosphere.  More specifically, NFPA 58 Section 6.7.4.6 (incorporated in § 
192.11(b)) requires the discharge of a relief device (such as a service regulator vent) to “be 
located not less than 5 ft (1.5 m) in any direction away from any source of ignition, openings into 
direct-vent (sealed combustion system) appliances, or mechanical ventilation air intakes.” Photos 
taken during the November 2022 site visit show a self-relieving service regulator located within 
5 feet of the air intake of an emergency generator at the "Shops of Waileau" system. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
3. 

§ 192.357 Customer meters and regulators: Installation. 

(a) Each meter and each regulator must be installed so as to minimize anticipated  
stresses upon the connecting piping and the meter. 

AmeriGas failed to adequately support service meters in a manner that minimized stresses on the 
service line piping.  During the November 2022 on-site inspection, PHMSA observed and 
photographed meters installed in a way that put undue stress on the connected piping.  One 
service meter at the "Shops of Wailea" (the emergency generator meter) was supported largely 
by the service line riser pipe and was only partially supported by a concrete pad.  On the "Pearl 
Kai" system, one meter (the “Club Chance” meter) was supported directly by the service line. 

This violation is a repeat of violations found in CPF # 5-2019-0016, Item # 1. 

4. 

§ 192.453 General. 

The corrosion control procedures required by § 192.605(b)(2), including those for the 
design, installation, operation, and maintenance of cathodic protection systems, must 
be carried out by, or under the direction of, a person qualified in pipeline corrosion 
control methods. 

AmeriGas failed to ensure that the operation and maintenance of their cathodic protection 
systems were carried out by a person qualified in corrosion control methods.  During the 
November 2022 site visits, PHMSA asked operator personnel (specifically the operator’s 
technicians of record of cathodic protection monitoring for Maui and Oahu) to describe and 
demonstrate how they collect pipe-to-soil readings to evaluate the level of cathodic protection. 
Based on the interviews and demonstrations, it was evident that AmeriGas failed to use 
adequately trained and qualified personnel to collect pipe-to-soil measurements.1 

The operator’s technicians on both Oahu and Maui were unaware of how to maintain the 
equipment used to collect pipe-to-soil potentials.  While the individuals each had two copper-
copper sulfate half-cells used to measure cathodic protection level, those individuals were not 
aware that one half-cell is to be kept out of the field and used as a calibration standard according 
to the manufacturer's literature and widely accepted industry practices.  Both cells had been used 
in the field and could not be used as a calibration standard.  The individuals interviewed stated 
that they believed the “field” half-cells had never been checked against an uncontaminated “lab” 
half-cell. 

In addition, the technician on Oahu collected pipe-to-soil measurements by placing the copper-
copper sulfate half cells in soils immediately above the magnesium spike anodes used to provide 
cathodic protection.  This practice results in inaccurate pipe-to-soil measurement due to the 
proximity of the anode.  The operator was not trained to take pipe-to-soil measurements at 
locations that would produce accurate potentials. 

1 See 49 CFR 192.463(a) and Appendix D for the specific requirements for pipe-to-soil measurements. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
 
5. 

§ 192.463 External corrosion control: Cathodic protection. 

(a) Each cathodic protection system required by this subpart must provide a level of 
cathodic protection that complies with one or more of the applicable criteria 
contained in appendix D of this part. If none of these criteria is applicable, the 
cathodic protection system must provide a level of cathodic protection at least equal to 
that provided by compliance with one or more of these criteria. 

AmeriGas failed to provide a level of cathodic protection that complied with one or more of the 
applicable criteria contained in Appendix D of part 192 for the "Pearl Kai" (Oahu) and "AAAAA 
Rent-A-Space " (Maui) systems.  During the November 2022 on-site inspections, PHMSA 
observed and photographed the operator measuring pipe-to-soil potentials less negative than -
850mV for both systems.  The systems use direct-bonded anodes at the tank risers for cathodic 
protection.  For the “Pearl Kai” system, the operator measured potentials at a riser and found 
potentials of approximately -418mV.  Records show that this riser was electrically isolated from 
the anode at the tank riser, and the measurements of cathodic protection potentials show that it 
was not receiving cathodic protection from the anode at the tank riser.  For the “AAAAA Rent-
A-Space” system, the operator measured potentials of approximately -600mV.  The 
measurement was collected directly over the buried pipe at a location approximately three to four 
feet from the anode, which is mechanically bonded to the pipe riser.  Although previously 
recorded cathodic protection measurements at this site were more negative than -850mV, the 
operator’s practice of using direct-bonded anodes and measuring the potentials in soils near and 
directly above the anodes resulted in incorrect measurements.  The measured potentials appeared 
more negative than they would be using correct measurement practices.  To ensure accurate 
measurements are obtained, the half-cell should be placed on soil directly over the pipeline at a 
location remote from the galvanic anode. 

6. 

§ 192.465 External corrosion control: Monitoring. 

(a) Each pipeline that is under cathodic protection must be tested at least once each 
calendar year, but with intervals not exceeding 15 months, to determine whether the 
cathodic protection meets the requirements of § 192.463. However, if tests at those 
intervals are impractical for separately protected short sections of mains or 
transmission lines, not in excess of 100 feet (30 meters), or separately protected service 
lines, these pipelines may be surveyed on a sampling basis. At least 10 percent of these 
protected structures, distributed over the entire system must be surveyed each 
calendar year, with a different 10 percent checked each subsequent year, so that the 
entire system is tested in each 10-year period. 

AmeriGas failed to test each pipeline under cathodic protection each calendar year at intervals 
not to exceed 15 months for two of their systems: 

•  Coconut Grove (Maui) - Cathodic protection monitoring worksheets are dated 

1/12/2022, 1/18/2020, and 1/19/2019.  No cathodic protection testing was completed 
in 2021. 

•  Wapahu Shopping Center (Oahu) - The cathodic protection potentials at the service 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
line risers had not been measured since 2018.  Cathodic protection test records in 2018 
showed that 2 service line risers and 1 tank riser were cathodically protected.  Since 
then, the operator has only measured potentials on the tank riser, which is electrically 
isolated from the service risers by a polyethylene main. 

Both systems were not systems for which annual testing would be impractical.  In addition, the 
operator’s procedures (“Operations and Maintenance Manual -Corrosion Control”) required each 
system to be tested on an annual basis at intervals not to exceed 15 months, and they did not 
make claim to the exceptions to the annual testing requirements allowed for certain pipelines. 

7. 

§ 192.467 External corrosion control: Electrical isolation. 

(a) Each buried or submerged pipeline must be electrically isolated from other 
underground metallic structures, unless the pipeline and the other structures are 
electrically interconnected and cathodically protected as a single unit. 

The "Pearl Kai" system lacked adequate isolation from its buried metallic support structures.  
The pipeline's riser is not an "anodeless" type riser; therefore must be cathodically protected, and 
to facilitate the application of cathodic protection, it must be isolated from other buried metallic 
structures.  During the November 14, 2022, on-site inspection, the pipe was visibly shorted to 
two “uni-strut" type pipe supports that were in direct contact with the soil.  In addition, the pipe 
was shorted to an adjacent bridge girder (the isolation union used between the buried segment 
from the segment supported by the bridge girder was tested for isolation during the November 
14, 2022 inspection and was not isolated (potentials on either side were substantially the same at 
approximately -375 millivolts). 

8. 

§ 192.481 Atmospheric corrosion control: Monitoring. 

(a) Each operator must inspect and evaluate each pipeline or portion of the pipeline 
that is exposed to the atmosphere for evidence of atmospheric corrosion, as follows: 

Pipeline type: 

Then the frequency of inspection is: 

(1)  Onshore  other  than  a 
Service Line 

At least once every 3 calendar years, but with 
intervals not exceeding 39 months. 

(2) Onshore Service Line 

At least once every 5 calendar years, but with 
intervals not exceeding 63 months, except as 
provided in paragraph (d) of this section. 

(3) Offshore 

At least once each calendar year, but with intervals 
not exceeding 15 months. 

AmeriGas failed complete atmospheric corrosion inspections at the required intervals for two of 
their systems: 

•  Coconut Grove (Maui) - The most recent documented atmospheric corrosion inspection 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
was on 1/8/2018.  There were none completed or documented since that time which 
exceeded the 39-month interval that is required for portions of the system other than 
service lines. 

•  Wahiawa Town Center (Oahu) - There were records for atmospheric corrosion 

inspections on 1/8/2014 and 7/28/2020, which exceeded 39 months. 

9. 

§ 192.517 Records. 

(a) . . . . 
(b) Each operator must maintain a record of each test required by §§ 192.509, 
192.511, and 192.513 for at least 5 years. 

AmeriGas failed to complete their pressure testing worksheets with relevant details.  The 
“Pipeline Test Report” pressure test record for several systems (for example, the Residences at 
Laule’a, Henry Street Landing, and Puna Kai Tank A) lacked relevant information such as test 
pressure, name of individual performing test, and date. 

10.  § 192.619 Maximum allowable operating pressure: Steel or plastic pipelines. 

(a) No person may operate a segment of steel or plastic pipeline at a pressure that 
exceeds a maximum allowable operating pressure (MAOP) determined under 
paragraph (c), (d), or (e) of this section, or the lowest of the following: 
(1) The design pressure of the weakest element in the segment, determined in 
accordance with subparts C and D of this part. However, for steel pipe in pipelines 
being converted under § 192.14 or uprated under subpart K of this part, if any 
variable necessary to determine the design pressure under the design formula (§ 
192.105) is unknown, one of the following pressures is to be used as design pressure: 

AmeriGas failed to operate several systems at pressures less than the pipeline’s MAOP.  The 
MAOP is limited by the weakest element of this system, and Subpart D prohibits the use of 
pipeline components at pressures greater than the pressure rating established by the 
manufacturer.2  According to operator records, the systems' established MAOPs are 10 psi, 
which is the maximum allowable inlet pressure of the second-stage service regulators (Fisher 
R622-DFF with a labeled maximum inlet pressure of 10 psi).  During the November 2022 on-site 
inspection, PHMSA observed and documented clock gauges showing the operating pressures of 
several systems operating at pressures greater than 10 psi: 

•  Shops of Waileau (Maui) - 14 psi 
•  Coconut Grove (Maui) - 12 psi 
•  Pukalani Terrance (Maui) 13 psi 
•  Ewa Point Marketplace (Oahu) - 13 psi 
•  Henry Street Landing (Hawaii) - 13 psi 

This violation is a repeat of violations found in CPF # 2-2018-0002, Item # 6 

2 See § 192.143(a) 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
 
 
11.  § 192.721 Distribution systems: Patrolling. 

(a) . . . . 
(b) Mains in places or on structures where anticipated physical movement or external 
loading could cause failure or leakage must be patrolled – 
(1) In business districts, at intervals not exceeding 4 ½  months, but at least four times 
each calendar year; 

AmeriGas failed to patrol their systems within business districts the required number of times per 
year and/or within the required time intervals: 

•  Maui Market (Maui) - 3 patrols were recorded in 2020. 
•  Manini Holdings/Brew Lot 12 (Hawaii) - 2 patrols were recorded in 2022, 3 patrols were 
recorded in 2021, none in 2020, and none in 2019.  The system was commissioned in 
2018. 

•  Henry St. Landing (Hawaii) - 2 patrols were recorded in 2022, 3 patrols were recorded in 
2021, 3 patrols were recorded in 2020, 1 patrol was recorded in 2019, and 2 patrols were 
recorded in 2018. 

•  Residences of Laulea (Hawaii) - One patrol was completed in 2018, and there were no 

other records documenting any patrols at this location since. 

12.  § 192.723 Distribution systems: Leakage surveys. 

(a) . . . . 
(b) The type and scope of the leakage control program must be determined by the 
nature of the operations and the local conditions, but it must meet the following 
minimum requirements: 
(1) A leakage survey with leak detector equipment must be conducted in business 
districts, including tests of the atmosphere in gas, electric, telephone, sewer, and water 
system manholes, at cracks in pavement and sidewalks, and at other locations 
providing an opportunity for finding gas leaks, at intervals not exceeding 15 months, 
but at least once each calendar year. 

AmeriGas failed to conduct leak surveys of their systems in business districts at intervals not 
exceeding 15 months but at least once each calendar year: 

•  Shops at Wailea (Maui) - the operator did not conduct a leak survey in 2020.  Surveys 

conducted 9/21/2022, 10/13/2021, 8/12/2019. 

•  Tosei (Maui) - the operator did not conduct a leak survey in 2020.  Surveys conducted 

11/5/2021, 10/15/2019, 12/19/2018. 

•  Shops at Mauna Lani (Hawaii) - the operator did not conduct a leak survey in 2019, 2020, 

or 2021.  Surveys conducted 10/25/22 and 8/30/18. 

This violation is a repeat of violations found in CPF # 5-2019-0016, Item # 6 

13.  § 192.739 Pressure limiting and regulating stations: Inspection and testing. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
(a) Each pressure limiting station, relief device (except rupture discs), and pressure 
regulating station and its equipment must be subjected at intervals not exceeding 15 
months, but at least once each calendar year, to inspections and tests to determine 
that it is – 

AmeriGas failed to inspect or adequately document the inspection of the regulators every year at 
intervals not to exceed 15 months: 

•  "Puna Kai" (Hawaii) system – the operator inspected the regulators on 8/26/19 and 

8/25/22 but did not inspect regulators in 2020 or 2021. The system was installed 8/22/19. 

•  "Residences of Laulea" (Hawaii) - the operator inspected the regulators on 8/26/22 and 

7/25/19 but did not inspect regulators in 2020 or 2021. 

14.  § 192.739 Pressure limiting and regulating stations: Inspection and testing. 

(a) Each pressure limiting station, relief device (except rupture discs), and pressure 
regulating station and its equipment must be subjected at intervals not exceeding 15 
months, but at least once each calendar year, to inspections and tests to determine 
that it is – 
(1) . . . . 
(2)  Adequate from the standpoint of capacity and reliability of operation for the 
service in which it is employed; 

AmeriGas failed to correct deficiencies identified during the inspection of the regulating 
equipment at "Shops at Wailua" system.  The operator personnel who conducted the regulator 
inspection of that system recognized it was inadequate from the standpoint of capacity and 
reliability for the service in which it is employed and, on March 19, 2019, generated a Sales and 
Service Order stating that AmeriGas "need to install a monitoring regulator."  According to 
statements made to PHMSA, the operator personnel was later told by superiors in AmeriGas that 
an additional monitoring regulator (i.e., pressure limiting device) was not needed. 

Photos taken during the November 12, 2022 inspection showed that the "Shops at Wailau" 
system had 2 parallel Fisher 627-7710 regulators (one per tank), and the associated regulating 
inspection worksheet showed that these regulators reduce the system’s pressure from 
approximately 118 psi to 10 psi (the reported MAOP of the pipeline) without overpressure 
protection in the event of a regulator failure.  Literature from the regulator's vendors and 
statements made by the regulator's vendor clearly demonstrate that a Fisher 627-7710 regulator 
lacks an internal relief valve and that additional overpressure protection (e.g., relief or limiting 
equipment) is needed.  Therefore, AmeriGas was aware as early as March 19, 2019, that the 
regulating equipment as it was configured at the Shops of Wailua system was inadequate but 
failed to correct it by November 12, 2022. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15.  § 192.747 Valve maintenance: Distribution systems. 

(a) Each valve, the use of which may be necessary for the safe operation of a 
distribution system, must be checked and serviced at intervals not exceeding 15 
months, but at least once each calendar year. 

The operator failed to inspect or record the inspection of valves that might be needed in an 
emergency annually at intervals not to exceed 15 months. "Key Valve Inspection Report" records 
documented the following: 

•  Coconut Grove (Maui)- Worksheets were completed in 2021, 2020, and 2018, but not for 

2019. 

•  Tosei (Maui) - Worksheets were completed in 2021 and 2019 but not for 2020. 
•  Residences of Laule'a (Hawaii) - Worksheets were completed in 2022 and 2020 but not 

for 2021. 

16.  § 192.751 Prevention of accidental ignition. 

Each operator shall take steps to minimize the danger of accidental ignition of gas in 
any structure or area where the presence of gas constitutes a hazard of fire or 
explosion, including the following: 
(a) When a hazardous amount of gas is being vented into open air, each potential 
source of ignition must be removed from the area and a fire extinguisher must be 
provided. 

AmeriGas failed to minimize the danger of accidental ignition and provide a fire extinguisher 
while gas was vented into the open air at their "AAAAA Storage" site.  During the November 
2022 site visit, the operator removed a plug fitting on a first-stage regulator to check the pressure 
with a clock gauge.  The operator accidentally removed the plug fitting from high-pressure (tank 
pressure) side of the regulator discharging high-pressure propane into the open air.  The operator 
did not have a fire extinguisher present, nor did they take other customary and reasonable steps 
to minimize the danger of accidental ignition, such as monitoring the atmosphere with a 
combustible gas meter. 

17.  § 192.805 Qualification program. 

Each operator shall have and follow a written qualification program. The program 
shall include provisions to: 
(a)  . . . . 
(b)  Ensure through evaluation that individuals performing covered tasks are 
qualified; 

AmeriGas failed to ensure that individuals performing tasks had been evaluated and could 
perform the assigned covered tasks, which is a requirement to be “qualified” under § 192.803.  
PHMSA observed worksheets where an operator inspected pressure-regulating equipment.  
When asked for the qualification records for that task, the relevant operator personnel stated that 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
he was not qualified for the task, and there was nothing on the regulator inspection worksheets 
suggesting that he worked under the span of control of a qualified individual. 

18.  § 192.805 Qualification program. 

Each operator shall have and follow a written qualification program. The program 
shall include provisions to: 
(a)  . . . . 
(b) Ensure through evaluation that individuals performing covered tasks are 
qualified; 

AmeriGas’s qualification program failed to ensure that individuals performing tasks were 
qualified to recognize and react to abnormal operating conditions (AOC), which is a requirement 
to be “qualified” under § 192.803. 

•  AmeriGas failed to train and qualify the operator of record for odorant testing for the 

Maui systems on how to recognize and respond to inadequate levels of odorization which 
is an AOC relevant to that task. AmeriGas uses Odorometer equipment to measure the 
concentration of propane-in-air at which the odorant is detectable and records the readily 
detectable level (RDL) and threshold detectable level (TDL) values on a worksheet.  The 
operator of record for the odorant monitoring task for the Maui systems could not 
describe what these values meant or what appropriate or actionable values were.  Upon 
reviewing the qualification materials for the operator, PHMSA found no mention of the 
terms RDL or TDL or what appropriate odorant concentrations or lower explosive limits 
were.  The operator stated that in addition to the qualification materials he provided, he 
was required to watch a video on the use of the Odorometer equipment, but that the video 
was generic instructions for the use of the equipment and did not include information on 
how to interpret the results. 

•  AmeriGas failed to train and qualify the operator of record for corrosion control practices 
for their Oahu systems to recognize and test for shorted pipe, an AOC relevant to that 
task. During the on-site inspection, PHMSA identified a visibly shorted pipe and asked 
the operator to test the isolation.  Although the operator had the equipment to conduct the 
test, he was not able to perform the task. 

Proposed Civil Penalty 

Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a 
related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022, and before 
January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the 
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after May 3, 2021, and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021, and before 
May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation 

 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after July 31, 2019, and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018, and before 
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a 
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679.  For violation occurring on or after November 2, 
2015, and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per 
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022. 

We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documentation involved for the above 
probable violation and recommend that you be preliminarily assessed a civil penalty of $550,100 
as follows: 

Item number 
4 
8 
10 
12 
14 
15 
17 
18 

PENALTY 
$75,200 
$35,700 
$168,600 
$83,400 
$72,600 
$36,100 
$39,100 
$39,400 

Proposed Compliance Order 

With respect to items 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 10, and 14, pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and 
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to AmeriGas 
Propane LP.  Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part 
of this Notice. 

Warning Items 

With respect to items 2, 9, 11, 13, and 16, we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting 
documents involved in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action 
or penalty assessment proceedings at this time.  We advise you to promptly correct these items. 
Failure to do so may result in additional enforcement action. 

Response to this Notice 

Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators 
in Enforcement Proceedings.  Please refer to this document and note the response options.  All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available.  If 
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment 
under 5 U.S.C. §552(b), along with the complete original document, you must provide a second 
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted 
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential 
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  The Region 
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted 
demonstrating good cause for an extension. 

In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 5-2023-029-NOPV, and for each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

Sincerely, 

Dustin Hubbard 
Director, Western Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

cc: 

PHP-60 Compliance Registry 
PHP-500 J. Gano (#22-251181) 
David Hedrick, AmeriGas Propane LP (david.hedrick@amerigas.com) 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to AmeriGas Propane LP a Compliance Order 
incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of AmeriGas 
Propane LP with the pipeline safety regulations: 

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

E. 

In regard to Item Number 1 of the Notice pertaining to over pressured meter at the 
“AAAAA Rent-A-Space” system, AmeriGas Propane LP must install a service 
regulator upstream of the meter and must remove, discard, and replace the over 
pressured meter within 30 days of receipt of the Final Order.  AmeriGas must 
provide written notice (including photographs) to the Director of the Western 
Region with 10 business days of completing this task. 

In regard to Number 3 of the Notice pertaining to inadequately supported meters, 
AmeriGas Propane LP must add or modify the supports on the Pearl Kai meter 
and the Shops of Wailea meter within 30 days of receipt of the Final Order and 
must provide written notice (including photographs) to the Director of the 
Western Region within 10 business days of completing this task. 

In regard to Item Number 5 of the Notice pertaining to inadequate levels of 
cathodic protection and Item Number 7 regarding inadequate isolation, AmeriGas 
Propane LP must: 

•  For the Pearl Kai system, replace the inadequately protected and 

electrically shorted steel risers with anodeless risers. 

•  For the Rent-A-Space, the operator must excavate and inspect the 
inadequately protected piping; and replace the pipe if evidence of 
corrosion is found.  The replacement pipe must be polyethylene with 
anodeless riser.  If no evidence of corrosion is found, AmeriGas may 
retain the existing steel piping but must install additional anodes to ensure 
the pipe has adequate cathodic protection.  

AmeriGas Propane LP must complete the above-listed actions within 30 days of 
receipt of the Final Order and must provide written notice (including 
photographs) to the Director of the Western Region within 10 business days of 
completing this task. 

In regard to Item Number 6 of the Notice pertaining to AmeriGas’s failure to 
monitor cathodic protection, AmeriGas Propane LP must replace the Wapahu 
Shopping Center steel risers with anodeless risers within 30 days of receipt of the 
Final Order and must provide written notice (including photographs) to the 
Director of the Western Region with 10 business days of completing this task. 

In regard to Item Number 10 of the Notice pertaining to overpressured liquified 
petroleum gas (LPG) systems AmeriGas Propane LP must, for the five LPG 
systems specifically described in Item 5: 

•  Discard and replace all service regulators that have been used at pressures 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
exceeding their labeled maximum inlet pressure. AmeriGas Propane LP 
must complete this task within 30 days of receipt of the Final Order and 
must provide written notice (including photographs) to the Director of the 
Western Region within 10 business days of completing this task. 
•  AmeriGas must submit to the Director of the Western Region detailed 

procedures for re-inspecting and adjusting the regulating equipment.  The 
procedure must be specific to each system’s configuration and must be 
adequate to ensure the systems’ MAOP is not exceeded during normal and 
no-flow (i.e., regulator lock-up conditions).  For series regulating setups, 
the procedure must include provisions to ensure the MAOP cannot be 
exceeded should the second-stage regulator fail.  AmeriGas Propane LP 
must provide the procedures within 30 days of receipt of the Final Order. 
Within 30 days from the time AmeriGas receives notice that the Western 
Region does not object to their procedures, AmeriGas must complete the 
inspection and adjustment of the subject regulators and must provide 
written notice (including photographs) to the Director of the Western 
Region with 10 business days of completing this task. 

F. 

G. 

In regard to Number 14 of the Notice pertaining to the lack of adequate pressure 
regulating equipment on the “Shops of Wailua” system, AmeriGas Propane LP 
must install overpressure protective equipment on the system to protect against 
the failure of the regulators.  AmeriGas Propane LP must adjust the regulating 
equipment in accordance with the written procedures described in Action E 
described above.  AmeriGas Propane LP must complete the installation of the 
regulating equipment within 30 days of receipt of the Final Order and must 
provide written notice (including photographs) to the Director of the Western 
Region with 10 business days of completing this task.  AmeriGas must inspect 
and adjust the regulating equipment in accordance with Action E described above. 

It is requested (not mandated) that AmeriGas Propane LP maintain documentation 
of the safety improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order 
and submit the total to Dustin Hubbard, Director, Western Region, Pipeline and 
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration.  It is requested that these costs be 
reported in two categories: 1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of 
plans, procedures, studies, and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with 
replacements, additions, and other changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
