NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
PROPOSED CIVIL PENALTY 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: dwbritton@fngas.com  

March 1, 2023 

Mr. Daniel Britton 
General Manager 
Interior Gas Utility  
2525 Phillips Field Road 
Fairbanks, AK 99709 

Dear Mr. Britton: 

CPF 5-2023-009-NOPV 

From August 2 through 6, 2021, a representative of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 
United States Code (U.S.C.), inspected your distribution system in Fairbanks, Alaska. 

As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that you have committed probable violations of the 
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR).  The items inspected 
and the probable violations are: 

1. 

§ 192.16  Customer notification. 

(a)  . . . .  
(b) Each operator shall notify each customer once in writing of the following 
information:  
(1) The operator does not maintain the customer’s buried piping. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(f)  To assure the proper concentration of odorant in accordance with this section, 
each operator must conduct periodic sampling of combustible gases using an 
instrument capable of determining the percentage of gas in air at which the odor 
becomes readily detectable. Operators of master meter systems may comply with 
this requirement by -  
(1)  Receiving written verification from their gas source that the gas has the proper 
concentration of odorant; and  
(2)  Conducting periodic “sniff” tests at the extremities of the system to confirm that 
the gas contains odorant. 

IGU did not conduct periodic sampling to assure the proper concentration of odorant in the North 
Pole distribution system.  IGU personnel stated to PHMSA inspectors that they had never 
conducted sampling of odorant concentration in the North Pole system.  The North Pole system 
was commissioned in January 2021, and, at the time of the inspection in August 2021, IGU had 
never sampled the odorant levels in the system to ensure the gas was readily detectable. 

7. 

§ 192.739   Pressure limiting and regulating stations: Inspection and testing. 

(a)  Each pressure limiting station, relief device (except rupture discs), and pressure 
regulating station and its equipment must be subjected at intervals not exceeding 15 
months, but at least once each calendar year, to inspections and tests to determine 
that it is -  
(1)  . . . . 
(3) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, set to control or relieve 
at the correct pressure consistent with the pressure limits of § 192.201(a); and 

IGU did not complete the required inspection and testing at pressure limiting and regulator 
station Site 1 in 2020.  IGU did not provide records demonstrating that pressure regulators at Site 
1 were inspected in 2020. 

8. 

§ 192.743   Pressure limiting and regulating stations: Capacity of relief devices. 

(a)  Pressure relief devices at pressure limiting stations and pressure regulating 
stations must have sufficient capacity to protect the facilities to which they are 
connected. Except as provided in § 192.739(b), the capacity must be consistent with 
the pressure limits of § 192.201(a).  This capacity must be determined at intervals 
not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar year, by testing the devices 
in place or by review and calculations. 

IGU did not confirm the capacity of overpressure protection blowdown pressure relief valve 
PRV-600 by in-place testing or by review and calculations as required by § 192.743(a).  

IGU provided records documenting pressure relief valve PRV-600 at Site 1 was lifted on 
9/24/2018 and 9/19/2019, but neither of those records indicated that the relief valve capacity was 
adequate.  IGU operators were aware that the relief device capacity was required to be reviewed 
or tested in place annually, but the records did not state that the Operator tested the device in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
place or that the capacity was reviewed and determined to be sufficient.  IGU personnel stated 
that they typically pop the relief using nitrogen, which tests the set point of the relief but does not 
test capacity.  IGU did not produce records demonstrating that the requirements of § 192.743 
were met via the review and calculations option offered by § 192.743(b).  A record for the 2020 
annual inspection or capacity review of PRV-600 was not produced during the inspection.  IGU 
previously received a warning for this alleged violation in CPF 5-2020-0003W. 

9. 

§ 192.747   Valve maintenance: Distribution systems. 

(a)  Each valve, the use of which may be necessary for the safe operation of a 
distribution system, must be checked and serviced at intervals not exceeding 15 
months, but at least once each calendar year. 

IGU did not conduct any distribution valve inspections in 2019.  There were some 2020 records 
demonstrating that some distribution valves were inspected; however, IGU’s distribution valve 
inspections focused on checking the conditions of the areas around valves and ensuring the 
valves were accessible but did not include checking the functionality and condition of the valves.  
For example, a record called Valve Inspection Form 2020 shows N/A for Valve Exercised 
column for each distribution valve listed as having been inspected in the year 2020. 

10. 

§ 192.756  Joining plastic pipe by heat fusion; equipment maintenance and 
calibration. 

Each operator must maintain equipment used in joining plastic pipe in accordance 
with the manufacturer's recommended practices or with written procedures that 
have been proven by test and experience to produce acceptable joints. 

IGU did not inspect and maintain their joining equipment as required by § 192.756.  IGU failed 
to provide any records to demonstrate that the required inspections had been performed and 
admitted their joining equipment was not being maintained per manufacturer’s recommended 
practices. 

11. 

§ 192.1007  What are the required elements of an integrity management plan? 

(a)  . . . . 
(c) Evaluate and rank risk. An operator must evaluate the risks associated with its 
distribution pipeline. In this evaluation, the operator must determine the relative 
importance of each threat and estimate and rank the risks posed to its pipeline. This 
evaluation must consider each applicable current and potential threat, the 
likelihood of failure associated with each threat, and the potential consequences of 
such a failure. An operator may subdivide its pipeline into regions with similar 
characteristics (e.g., contiguous areas within a distribution pipeline consisting of 
mains, services and other appurtenances; areas with common materials or 
environmental factors), and for which similar actions likely would be effective in 
reducing risk. 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
IGU did not have a written procedure that described the integrity management risk ranking and 
evaluation process, and the IGU Engineering Department personnel who manage and administer 
IGU’s Distribution Integrity Management Plan (DIMP) were not familiar with the Simple, 
Handy, Risk-based Integrity Management Program (SHRIMP) software and were unable to 
explain the risk reranking completed by IGU. 

IGU's DIMP began with a document that was titled Appendix F, pages 6&7 of DIMP Part 1, 
which provided a procedural overview of the DIMP.  Appendix F explained a method for 
evaluating and ranking risks by creating Evaluate and Rank Risk tables to be compiled with 
historical data and used as an outlining tool to evaluate and rank the risks associated with the 
distribution system. This risk ranking process described in the DIMP was not used in the 
analysis.  Rather, IGU's risk ranking was completed via a software program called SHRIMP 
(beginning page 13/40 of DIMP Part 1).  IGU reordered the risk ranking provided by the 
SHRIMP program but failed to document the reason for the reordering of the risk ranking or 
document adequate explanations for why the risk ranking was changed. 

12. 

§  192.1007  What are the required elements of an integrity management plan? 

(a)  . . . . 
(d)  Identify and implement measures to address risks. Determine and implement 
measures designed to reduce the risks from failure of its gas distribution pipeline. 
These measures must include an effective leak management program (unless all 
leaks are repaired when found). 

IGU did not implement measures designed to reduce the risks from failure of its gas distribution 
pipelines. 

The DIMP did not require additional actions to prevent or mitigate its number 2 risk, identified 
as: "Equipment Malfunctions Due to Failing Regulators/relief Valves on the Failing Equipment".  
IGU’s DIMP stated additional actions associated with the mitigation of this risk were not 
required because "FNG's1 SOPs adequately provide for the inspection and testing of equipment, 
including regulators and relief valves" (page 35/40 of DIMP Part 1). However, no documentation 
was provided that demonstrated customer regulators and meters were inspected on a regular 
basis. 

Additionally, the risk ranked number 5, "Material, Weld or Joint Due to Workmanship Defects 
on the Specific_02 section", had an additional action selected of accelerating leakage surveys to 
be conducted annually for this section of the system (page 38/40 of DIMP Part 1).  When 
questioned about this, IGU personnel weren't aware of the Specific_02 section and what part of 
the system it represented.  No segments of IGU's system were on an accelerated leakage survey 
schedule beyond what is required in the code. 

Finally, the threat ranked as risk number 6, “Other Outside Forces” stated that IGU had to 
perform patrols to ensure proper meter maintenance periodically (page 39/40 of DIMP Part 1). 

1 The Operator Interior Gas Utility (IGU) formerly operated the Fairbanks distribution system under operator name 
Fairbanks Natural Gas (FNG). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
However, IGU personnel were unsure whether this was being done and was unable to produce 
any records documenting these actions had been taken.  

Proposed Civil Penalty 
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a 
related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before 
January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the 
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations. For violation 
occurring on or after May 3, 2021 and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for 
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before 
May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation 
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations. For violation 
occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for 
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before 
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a 
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679. For violation occurring on or after November 2, 
2015 and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per 
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022. 

We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documentation involved for the above 
probable violations and recommend that you be preliminarily assessed a civil penalty of 
$107,400 as follows: 

Item number 
4 
6 
7 

PENALTY 
$ 20,400 
$ 50,200 
$ 36,800 

Warning Items  
With respect to items 2, 5, 10 and 12, we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting 
documents involved in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action 
or penalty assessment proceedings at this time.  We advise you to promptly correct these items.  
Failure to do so may result in additional enforcement action. 

Proposed Compliance Order 
With respect to items 1, 3, 6, 8, 9, and 11 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and 
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Interior Gas 
Utility.  Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of 
this Notice. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Response to this Notice 

Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators 
in Enforcement Proceedings.  Please refer to this document and note the response options.  All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available.  If 
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment 
under 5 U.S.C. §552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second 
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted 
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential 
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  The Region 
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted 
demonstrating good cause for an extension. 

In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 5-2023-009-NOPV, and for each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

Sincerely, 

Dustin Hubbard 
Director, Western Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

cc: 

PHP-60 Compliance Registry 
PHP-500 G. St. Pierre (#21-217219)   
Mark Rockwell, Interior Gas Utility (via email) 
Brendan Kern, Engineer, Interior Gas Utility (via email) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to Interior Gas Utility (IGU) a Compliance Order 
incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of Interior Gas 
Utility with the pipeline safety regulations: 

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

E 

F.  

G. 

In regard to Item Number 1 of the Notice pertaining to IGU not having a customer 
notification process in place that satisfied the requirements of § 192.16, IGU must 
update their procedures to include a customer notification process that satisfies 
the requirement of § 192.16, notify all their customers of the information required 
by § 192.16, and submit to PHMSA documentation that customers were given 
notice within 180 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item Number 3 of the Notice pertaining to qualified personnel 
conducting atmospheric corrosion inspections, IGU must properly train and 
qualify personnel to conduct atmospheric corrosion inspections and provide 
training records to the Director within 180 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item Number 6 of the Notice pertaining to odorant sampling, IGU 
must complete sampling the North Pole distribution system with properly 
calibrated odorant sampling equipment.  Please provide calibration and sampling 
records to the Director within 180 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item Number 8 of the Notice pertaining to capacity of overpressure 
protection blowdown pressure relief valve PRV-600, IGU must confirm the 
capacity PRV-600 by in-place testing or by review and calculations as required by 
§ 192.743(a). Please provide evidence of completion of this task to the Director 
within 180 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item Number 9 of the Notice pertaining to required distribution valve 
inspections including functionality checks, IGU must inspect and exercise every 
distribution valve, document the inspections appropriately and submit records to 
the Director within 270 days of receipt of the Final Order. 

In regard to Item Number 11 of the Notice pertaining to the Distribution Integrity 
Management Plan (DIMP) risk ranking and evaluation process, IGU must submit 
a new risk ranking and evaluation that is completed as described in the operator’s 
procedures, with a risk ranking that is adequately defended within 270 days of 
receipt of the Final Order. 

It is requested (not mandated) that Interior Gas Utility maintain documentation of 
the safety improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and 
submit the total to Dustin Hubbard, Director, Western Region, Pipeline and 
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration.  It is requested that these costs be 
reported in two categories: 1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of 
plans, procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with 
replacements, additions and other changes to pipeline infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
