NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION 
and 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: MR. ERIC ORMOND 

August 21, 2023 

Mr. Eric Ormond 
Senior VP, Engineering & Project Management 
Tres Palacios Holdings LLC 
811 Main Street, Suite 3400 
Houston, TX, 77002 

Dear Mr. Ormond: 

CPF 5-2023-054-NOPV 

From April 25, 2023 to April 27, 2023, a representative of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials 
Safety Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 
United States Code (U.S.C.), inspected the Tres Palacios System in El Campo, Texas. 

As a result of the inspection, it is alleged Tres Palacios Holding LLC (Tres Palacios) has 
committed probable violations of the Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal 
Regulations (CFR).  The items inspected and the probable violations are: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
1. 

§192.917  How does an operator identify potential threats to pipeline integrity and 
use the threat identification in its integrity program? 

(a) … 
(b) Data gathering and integration. To identify and evaluate the potential threats to a 
covered pipeline segment, an operator must gather and integrate existing data and 
information on the entire pipeline that could be relevant to the covered segment. In 
performing this data gathering and integration, an operator must follow the 
requirements in ASME/ANSI B31.8S, section 4. At a minimum, an operator must 
gather and evaluate the set of data specified in Appendix A to ASME/ANSI B31.8S, 
and consider both on the covered segment and similar non-covered segments, past 
incident history, corrosion control records, continuing surveillance records, 
patrolling records, maintenance history, internal inspection records and all other 
conditions specific to each pipeline. 
(c) Risk assessment. An operator must conduct a risk assessment that follows 
ASME/ANSI B31.8S, section 5, and considers the identified threats for each covered 
segment. An operator must use the risk assessment to prioritize the covered 
segments for the baseline and continual reassessments (§ 192.919, 192.921, 192.937), 
and to determine what additional preventive and mitigative measures are needed (§  
192.935) for the covered segment. 
(d) … 
(e) Actions to address particular threats. If an operator identifies any of the following 
threats, the operator must take the following actions to address the threat. 
(1) … 
(5) Corrosion. If an operator identifies corrosion on a covered pipeline segment that 
could adversely affect the integrity of the line (conditions specified in §  192.933), the 
operator must evaluate and remediate, as necessary, all pipeline segments (both 
covered and non-covered) with similar material coating and environmental 
characteristics. An operator must establish a schedule for evaluating and 
remediating, as necessary, the similar segments that is consistent with the operator's 
established operating and maintenance procedures under part 192 for testing and 
repair. 

Tres Palacios failed to adequately gather, integrate, and evaluate potential threats to their 
pipeline. In addition, the operator failed to perform an adequate risk assessment or determine 
proper preventive and mitigative measures regarding corrosion identified on the pipeline. During 
inspection, PHMSA reviewed the operator’s records and found that multiple anomalies were 
found during the 2018 in line inspection (ILI) run with substantial metal loss. While records 
indicate the pipeline was constructed in 2008, the 2018 ILI showed significant corrosion with the 
average depth on the 23 internal corrosion anomalies being 25%, and the 251 external corrosion 
anomalies being 22%. However, a review of the records demonstrated that no follow up analysis 
or monitoring has occurred since discovery of the corrosion to determine the cause of the 
corrosion, or if metal loss is continuing. ASME/ANSI B31.8S-2004, section 5, paragraph 5.11 
states in part that “a recalculation of each segment’s risk after integrity assessment and/or 
mitigation action is required to ensure that the segment’s integrity can be maintained to the next 
inspection interval.” Additionally, a schedule for continued evaluating and remediating  

 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
corrosion required by §192.917(e) had not been established according to Tres Palacios 
procedures. 

Therefore, Tres Palacios failed to comply with §192.917(b), (c) and (e) by failing to gather, 
integrate, evaluate and analyze in a risk assessment that follows ASME/ANSI B31.8S, section 5, 
the identified threat of corrosion for each covered segment. 

2. 

§192.161  Supports and Anchors. 

(a)  Each pipeline and its associated equipment must have enough anchors or 
supports to: 
(1) Prevent undue strain on connected equipment; 
(2) Resist longitudinal forces caused by a bend or offset in the pipe; and 
(3) Prevent or damp out excessive vibration. 
(b) Each exposed pipeline must have enough supports or anchors to protect the 
exposed pipe joints from the maximum end force caused by internal pressure and 
any additional forces caused by temperature expansion or contraction or by the 
weight of the pipe and its contents. 
(c) Each support or anchor on an exposed pipeline must be made of durable, 
noncombustible material and must be designed and installed as follows: 
(1) Free expansion and contraction of the pipeline between supports or anchors may 
not be restricted. 
(2) Provision must be made for the service conditions involved. 
(3) Movement of the pipeline may not cause disengagement of the support 
equipment. 
(d) Each support on an exposed pipeline operated at a stress level of 50 percent or 
more of SMYS must comply with the following: 
(1) A structural support may not be welded directly to the pipe. 
(2) The support must be provided by a member that completely encircles the pipe. 

Tres Palacios failed to properly support their pipeline and equipment, resulting in excess 
localized stress. Specifically, during the field inspection, PHMSA identified multiple improper 
supports along the pipeline including a wooden 4 x 4 pipe support, and concrete supports with no 
cushion. 

Therefore, Tres Palacios failed to comply with §192.161 by failing to properly support their 
pipeline. 

3. 

§192.605  Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies. 

(a) General. Each operator shall prepare and follow for each pipeline, a manual of 
written procedures for conducting operations and maintenance activities and for 
emergency response… 

Tres Palacios failed to follow its procedures for conducting the annual class location analysis. 
Specifically, during the inspection, PHMSA reviewed the operator’s operations and maintenance 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
manual (O&M).  Operator O&M section 2.6 lists eight bulleted requirements for conducting a 
class location analysis however, a review of Tres Palacios’ records demonstrated that bullets 2, 
3, 4, 5, and 8 were not included in the class location analysis for the years 2020 through 2023. 

Therefore, Tres Palacios failed to comply with §192.605(a) by failing to follow their written 
procedures. 

4. 

§192.710  Transmission lines: Assessments outside of high consequence areas. 

(a) Applicability: This section applies to onshore steel transmission pipeline segments 
with a maximum allowable operating pressure of greater than or equal to 30% of 
the specified minimum yield strength and are located in: 
(1) … 
(2) A moderate consequence area as defined in § 192.3, if the pipeline segment can 
accommodate inspection by means of an instrumented inline inspection tool (i.e., 
“smart pig”). 
(3) … 
(b) General -
(1) Initial assessment. An operator must perform initial assessments in accordance 
with this section based on a risk-based prioritization schedule and complete initial 
assessment for all applicable pipeline segments no later than July 3, 2034, or as soon 
as practicable but not to exceed 10 years after the pipeline segment first meets the 
conditions of § 192.710(a) (e.g., due to a change in class location or the area becomes 
a moderate consequence area), whichever is later. 

Tres Palacios failed to implement a Baseline Assessment Plan (BAP) upon identification of 
Moderate Consequence Areas (MCAs). The pipeline safety regulations require operators to 
establish a BAP for MCAs. Implemented in 2019 and effective as of July 1, 20201, this 
requirement includes operators who previously had no pipelines located in high consequence 
areas and thus no Integrity Management Program (IMP), and requires those operators to develop 
an IMP, including a BAP, within one year after identifying MCA locations.  At the time of the 
inspection, a review of Tres Palacios’ records indicated that it had identified two MCA locations 
on its system in 2021.  However, the review of Tres Palacios’ procedures showed Tres Palacios 
had not developed a BAP or IMP for those pipelines. 

Therefore, Tres Palacios failed to comply with §192.710 by failing to implement an IMP and 
develop a BAP upon identification of MCAs on its system. 

1 See 84 FR 52250. 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5. 

§192.479  Atmospheric corrosion control: General. 

(a) Each operator must clean and coat each pipeline or portion of pipeline that is 
exposed to the atmosphere, except pipelines under paragraph (c) of this section. 
(b) Coating material must be suitable for the prevention of atmospheric corrosion. 
(c) Except portions of pipelines in offshore splash zones or soil-to-air interfaces, the 
operator need not protect from atmospheric corrosion any pipeline for which the 
operator demonstrates by test, investigation, or experience appropriate to the 
environment of the pipeline that corrosion will -
(1) Only be a light surface oxide; or 
(2) Not affect the safe operation of the pipeline before the next scheduled inspection. 

Tres Palacios Holdings LLC failed to adequately coat and protect their pipeline against 
atmospheric corrosion. During the Field Inspection, PHMSA identified numerous areas of 
atmospheric corrosion including excessive paint peeling and coating disbondment causing under-
film migration of moisture and external corrosion and pitting. 

Therefore, Tres Palacios failed to comply with §192.479 by failing protect their pipeline against 
atmospheric corrosion. 

Proposed Civil Penalty 
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed 
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a 
related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before 
January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the 
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after May 3, 2021 and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before 
May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation 
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations.  For violation 
occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not 
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for 
a related series of violations.  For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before 
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a 
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679.  For violation occurring on or after November 2, 
2015 and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per 
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022. 

We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved in this case, and have 
decided not to propose a civil penalty assessment at this time. 

Proposed Compliance Order 
With respect to Item 1 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Tres Palacios Holdings LLC. Please refer 
to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this Notice. 

 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Warning Items 
With respect to Items 2 through 5, we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting 
documents involved in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action 
or penalty assessment proceedings at this time.  We advise you to promptly correct these Items. 
Failure to do so may result in additional enforcement action. 

Response to this Notice 
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators 
in Enforcement Proceedings.  Please refer to this document and note the response options.  All 
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available.  If 
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment 
under 5 U.S.C. §552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second 
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted 
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential 
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b). 

Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed 
Response Options.  If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes 
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate 
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to 
you and to issue a Final Order.  If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit 
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice.  The Region 
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted 
demonstrating good cause for an extension. 

In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 5-2023-054-NOPV and, for each 
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible. 

Sincerely, 

Dustin Hubbard 
Director, Western Region, Office of Pipeline Safety 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration 

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order 

Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings 

cc: 

PHP-60 Compliance Registry 
PHP-500 M. Buss (23-264167) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER 

Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to Tres Palacios Holdings LLC a Compliance Order 
incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of Tres Palacios 
Holdings LLC with the pipeline safety regulations: 

A. 

B. 

In regard to Item 1 of the Notice pertaining to failure to adequately gather, 
integrate, and evaluate potential threats to their pipeline, Tres Palacios Holdings 
LLC must assess the potential corrosion growth rate via ILI and perform a root 
cause analysis within 180 days of receipt of the Final Order. Furthermore, the 
Operator should monitor corrosion rates via appropriate methods going forward. 

It is requested (not mandated) Tres Palacios Holdings LLC maintain 
documentation of the safety improvement costs associated with fulfilling this 
Compliance Order and submit the total to Dustin Hubbard, Director, Western 
Region, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration.  It is requested 
that these costs be reported in two categories: 1) total cost associated with 
preparation/revision of plans, procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost 
associated with replacements, additions and other changes to pipeline 
infrastructure. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
