UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

A Lived Informatics Model of Personal Informatics 

Daniel A. Epstein1, An Ping2, James Fogarty1, Sean A. Munson2 
1Computer Science & Engineering, 2Human Centered Design & Engineering 
DUB Group, University of Washington 
{depstein, jfogarty}@cs.washington.edu, {anping, smunson}@uw.edu 

ABSTRACT 
Current  models  of  how  people  use  personal  informatics 
systems are largely based in behavior change goals. They do 
not  adequately  characterize  the  integration  of  self-tracking 
into  everyday  life  by  people  with  varying  goals.  We  build 
upon  prior  work  by  embracing  the  perspective  of  lived 
informatics to propose a new model of personal informatics. 
We examine how lived informatics manifests in the habits of 
self-trackers across a variety of domains, first by surveying 
105, 99, and 83 past and present trackers of physical activity, 
finances, and location and then by interviewing 22 trackers 
regarding their lived informatics experiences. We develop a 
model characterizing tracker processes of deciding to track 
and selecting a tool, elaborate on tool usage during collection, 
integration,  and  reflection  as  components  of  tracking  and 
acting,  and  discuss  the  lapsing  and  potential  resuming  of 
tracking.  We  use  our  model  to  surface  underexplored 
challenges  in  lived  informatics,  thus  identifying  future 
directions for personal informatics design and research.  

Author Keywords 
Lived Informatics; Personal Informatics; Self-Tracking; 
Lapsing; Physical Activity; Finances; Location. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI). 

INTRODUCTION 
Personal informatics, or collecting and reflecting on personal 
information,  has  become  increasingly  prevalent.  Personal 
informatics can serve a goal-driven purpose, such as tracking 
weight loss, increasing physical activity, having a record of 
places  visited,  or  tracking  student  loan  payments.  Beyond 
these goal-driven motivations, self-tracking tools are now a 
part  of  everyday  life,  or  “lived  informatics”,  with  people 
tracking out of curiosity or a fascination with numbers [34]. 
The pervasiveness of self-tracking tools has led researchers 
to  study  people’s  use  of  commercial  tools  for  tracking 
location  [24,30],  finances  [20],  food  [11],  weight  [19,25], 
and  physical  activity  [16,34]  and  to  develop  research 
prototypes to expand our understanding of usage [3,8,12,40]. 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored.
Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
UbiComp '15, September 7-11, 2015, Osaka, Japan. 
Copyright 2015 © ACM 978-1-4503-3574-4/15/09...$15.00. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804250 

The first and most commonly used model for understanding 
how  people  use  personal  informatics  tools  is  Li  et  al.’s 
five-stage model [21]. The model characterizes how people 
transition  between  preparation,  collection,  integration, 
reflection, and action, describing the iterative nature of these 
stages  and  the  barriers  that  prevent  transitions.  The  model 
emphasizes an end goal of knowledge supporting behavior 
change.  The  model  has  since  been  expanded  and  clarified, 
dividing  and  combining  stages.  For  goal-oriented  trackers, 
reflection  can  be  divided  into  maintenance  and  discovery 
[22].  For  some  trackers,  engagement  with  and  gaining  an 
understanding  of  personal  data  may  be  the  goal  in  itself, 
causing the action stage to be foregone [41]. Reflection often 
occurs  during  collection  rather  than  being  a  separate  stage 
[6], which leads to an alternative three-stage iterative model 
of configuration, data capture, and feedback [7]. 

However,  research  on  everyday  self-tracking  behavior 
identifies several uses of personal informatics not described 
by  current  models.  For  example,  the  five-stage  model 
describes  self-trackers  switching  tools  to  better  fit  their 
information  needs  [21].  People  also  switch  tools  because 
their  devices  break  [16,34],  they  change  phones  [34],  or 
because 
[34]. 
Self-trackers also fail to sustain the habit or get frustrated and 
give up on tools [11]. Articulating a model that encompasses 
these behaviors can offer better guidance to designers.  

receive  a  new 

recommendation 

they 

To develop this model, we studied self-tracking of a variety 
of behaviors to understand how lived informatics manifests 
in the habits of self-trackers. Specifically, we surveyed 105, 
99,  and  83  past  and  present  trackers  of  physical  activity, 
finances,  and  location  on  their  habits  and  conducted  22 
interviews. We report on how people decide to start tracking 
and pick a tool, how they use that tool, how and why people 
switch  between  tools,  and  why  people  stop  tracking.  We 
develop  an  expanded  model  that  captures  the  practices  of 
self-trackers  motivated  to  track  to  change  behaviors, 
instrumenting an activity, and curiosity. 

Specifically, we find: 
•  In  addition  to  being  motivated  to  track  in  support  of 
behavior change goals, people start tracking to instrument 
an activity or out of pure curiosity. 

•  People’s  motivations  for  tracking  guide  the  selection  of 
tracking  tools.  Behavior-change  trackers  do  substantial 
background  research  and  optimize  a  tool  for  their  goal, 
instrumental  trackers  try  to  maximize  their  benefit  from 
the  tools,  and  curiosity-driven  trackers  often  do  not 
actively consider tool selection. 

731

 
 
 
 
•  Usage of tools varies by domain and reason for tracking, 
primarily  because  people’s  motivations  are  different  in 
each domain. Behavior change trackers collect and review 
data  frequently  and  are  bothered  by  inaccurate  logs, 
instrumental trackers track when the benefits outweigh the 
effort, and curiosity-driven trackers are motivated by how 
interesting they find the data they are tracking. 

•  People frequently switch tools, and in doing so learn about 

what and how they are interested in tracking.  

•  People  lapse  in  their  tool  use  in  four  different  ways: 
track,  difficulty  managing  upkeep, 

forgetting 
intentionally skipping entries, and suspending tracking. 

to 

These  findings  inform  a  revised  model  of  how  people  use 
self-tracking  tools,  independent  of  original  motivation, 
supplementing  the  stage-based  model  for  behavior-change 
tracking. This informs a set of open design problems: 
•  Designing to resume tracking after a lapse, including how 
to use historical data collected before, or even during, the 
lapse.  For  example,  should  a  food  journal  present 
someone’s  previous  eating  habits  when  they  decide  to 
resume tracking to aid in weight loss? If so, how? 

•  Designing to avoid inertia around a long-used tool that no 
longer  supports  a  self-tracker’s  goal.  For  example,  how 
can a financial tracking tool integrate historical data and 
provide an intuitive interface to a person who has managed 
their finances with a custom spreadsheet for years? 

•  Designing to support people’s various goals and transitions 
between  them.  How can the design of a location-tracking 
application  like  Foursquare  support  someone  who,  upon 
receiving a badge for frequent check-ins, becomes curious 
or  even  concerned  about  how  much  they  spend  at 
restaurants?  Can  a  location  diary  like  Moves  show 
someone who tries the application out of curiosity how it 
can help them achieve their fitness goals? 

BACKGROUND 
This  section  reviews  prior  work  on  models  of  personal 
informatics  use,  research  examining  how  people  use  tools, 
and how that use changes over time. 

Models of Personal Informatics 
Li et al. develop a stage-based model of personal informatics 
systems  and  describe  barriers  people  face  in  each  stage 
(Figure 1) [21]. The model has five stages: 1) preparation, or 
starting to collect data and thinking about what information 
to  record  and  how  to  collect  it;  2)  collection,  or  gathering 
data;  3)  integration,  or  preparing  data  to  reflect  upon; 
4) reflection, or examining and exploring data; and 5) action, 
or  taking  one’s  newfound  understanding  of  themselves  to 
inform changes. Motivated by the Transtheoretical Model of 
Behavior  Change  (TTM)  [32],  Li  et  al.  later  identify  two 
phases  of  reflection,  discovery  and  maintenance,  and  note 
people ask different types of questions in each phase [22]. 

From  studying  practices  of  the  Quantified  Self  movement, 
Choe  et  al.  learn  that  reflection  often  occurs  when  data  is 
captured  [6]  and  propose  a  new  model  for  self-monitoring 

732

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

Figure 1. Li et al.’s five-stage model of personal informatics,
reprinted  with  permission  [21].  Primarily  informed  by
tracking toward behavior change, the model emphasizes data
barriers toward a presumed action. We extend this model to
characterize challenges in lived informatics. 
technology, including reflection through data capture as well 
as through feedback [7]. Similarly, Whooley et al. note the 
potential  for  personal  informatics  tools  to  support  Schön’s 
reflection-in-action  [36],  where  self-trackers  contemplate 
their data and change their behavior while tracking [41]. 

These models describe trackers who have a behavior change 
goal, but some have other motivations. People also self-track 
for self-understanding [34], never acting upon their data. 

Starting to Track 
Many people start tracking because they have goals in mind 
[15,19,22,34].  Weight  trackers  often  have  a  specific  target 
weight,  and  use  the  weight  as  a  proxy  for  their  progress 
towards  other  fitness  goals  [19].  Although  many  physical 
activity  trackers  track  to  change  or  maintain  a  behavior, 
others  start  without  a  specific  goal or use  tools  to help  set 
goals (e.g., determine what actions to take to fix a problem 
[22] or identify the “baseline” to observe changes [34]). 

Rewards, such as discounts or badges, motivate many people 
to track location (e.g., Foursquare [24]) and physical activity 
[34].  Some  start  tracking  physical  activity  to  generate 
income  (e.g.,  recording  workouts  on  Pact)  [34].  Many 
Foursquare  users  also  start  tracking  to  offer  awareness  to 
friends  and  see  where  they  are, or  simply  to  keep  track  of 
places  they  have  been  (e.g.,  bars  and  restaurants)  [21]. 
People also start tracking to keep a record for later retrieval, 
such as TV shows and movies watched [22]. 

Another  common  motivation  to  start  tracking  is  out  of 
curiosity [24] or an interest in quantitative data [21]. Some 
food journalers [11] and physical activity trackers [34] start 
tracking  to  learn  more  about  their  behavior,  such  as  their 
eating habits or steps walked in their daily commute. 

People  select  specific  tracking  tools  based  on  features, 
branding,  convenience  (e.g.,  whether  it  is  easy  to  carry), 
recommendations of friends and relatives, and reviews in app 
stores  and  media  [20,21,34].  People  often  receive  tools  as 
gifts, which is a selection on their behalf [34]. 

How People Track 
People collect personal data with varying frequency based on 
the kind of data. For example, food consumption is typically 

 
 
SESSION: PERSUASIVE AND PERSONAL

tracked several times a day, while one may only track books 
read a few times per month [21]. People may also track only 
some of their activities (e.g., particular cycle rides or hikes), 
or everything (e.g., a food log or a complete step count) [34]. 

The length of tool usage varies by domain. Many who track 
physical activity have kept records for a year or more [16], 
though newcomers reduce the average duration of use [34]. 
Financial  trackers  use  tools  for  longer,  such  as  non-digital 
systems to keep track of investment in municipal bonds for 
nearly 50 years [20]. Food journalers vary in how long they 
keep the habit, ranging from 1 week to over 2 years, with a 
median  of  7-12  months  [10].  Tool  usage  also  varies  by 
availability. Commercial activity trackers are much newer than 
non-digital methods often used to track finances and food. 

People rarely maintain use of the same tool and often switch 
and  mix  tools  when  tracking  [34].  Some  people  track  the 
same  habit  with  two  tools,  which  leads  to  synchronization 
complications  (e.g.,  step  tracking  with  a  pedometer  and  a 
phone  app  syncing  to  MyFitnessPal)  [21].  Others  track 
different types of activities with different tools (e.g., Map My 
Run  for  running  and  Wii  Fit  for  weight  monitoring  [34]), 
which  usually  leads  to  difficulties  in  organizing  and 
reviewing data across separate tools and formats [21]. 

Many  physical  activity  trackers  look  at  their  information 
immediately  after  collection  [21]  to  gain  awareness  of 
current status and correct behavior towards goals (e.g., see 
their current step total and how many more steps needed for 
10,000  steps)  [16,34].  Some  people  show  little  interest  in 
reflecting on long-term data [34], while others use it to see 
patterns and trends over time [22]. Financial trackers use the 
idea of a financial touch, or a quick glimpse at data to gain 
awareness into their financial situations [20]. 

People change their goals and practices over time, which is 
not  well-supported  by  personal  informatics  systems  [22]. 
These changes sometimes lead to selecting a new tool [21]. 
Some people who start without clear goals narrow their data 
collection once they identify actionable goals, moving from 
discovery  phase  to  maintenance  phase  of  reflecting  [22]. 
People also switch tools as their practices evolve over time 
and  what  a  system  supports  does  no  longer  matches  their 
priorities (e.g., a jogger starting to do yoga) [16]. 

Lapsing and Infrequent Use 
Documentary  tracking  focuses  on  documenting  activities 
instead  of  changing  them.  It  can  be  accomplished  with  a 
relatively short-term endeavor to build up a collection of data 
for reflection, and many people stop tracking after reflecting 
[34]. However, this is not true for everyone. Some long-term 
physical  activity  trackers  continue  to  track  after  they  have 
learned  their  patterns  and  routines,  because  they  either 
benefit  from  the  continuous  reflection  or  the  application 
continues to keep a record without interaction (e.g., passively 
recording activity from phone accelerometer data) [16]. 

In studies of research prototypes, some participants reduce 
their interactions from a daily basis to a few times a week as 

studies  progress  [23].  Participants  mention  inconvenience, 
forgetting to log, and forgetting to put on a wearable device 
as  reasons  for  the  reducing  their  use.  Abandonment  of 
consumer technology has been studied in other areas of HCI. 
Dawe reports that 35% of purchased assistive technologies 
are not adopted, and recommends that designs be simple to 
configure, upgrade, and replace (in addition to interact with) 
[13]. Schoenebeck notes that people take breaks from social 
media to spend more time on their “real lives” [35]. 

METHODS 
We selected three domains of self-tracking to study: physical 
activity,  location,  and finances. We  strived  for diversity  in 
the  types  of  data  tracked,  similar  to  the  original  five-stage 
model  [21]  and  its  proposed  expansions  and  clarifications 
[6,22,41]. Physical activity was selected because it is perhaps 
the most common topic of self-tracking today, is included by 
default with present and announced wearables (e.g., Apple 
HealthKit and Watch, Microsoft Band), and is often studied 
when  making  broader  claims  about  personal  informatics 
(e.g.,  [15,16,34]).  Finances  were  selected  because  people 
have  long  tracked  them  manually  (e.g.,  ledgers  and  then 
spreadsheets) and there are now tools that support tracking 
finances  automatically  (e.g.,  tools  from  a  bank  or  an 
aggregator such as Mint.com). Location tracking is common 
and  is  a  historically  important  branch  of  research  in  the 
Ubicomp  community  (e.g.  [9,18,24,37,38]).  Prior  work 
suggests  that  location  tracking  may  differ  from  the  other 
domains, in that it is often socially motivated and goals are 
typically  less  articulated  and  numeric  compared  to  other 
domains.  The  equivalent  of  “walk  10,000  steps  today”  or 
“save $1,000 this month” is unclear for location tracking. 

Survey Methods 
We surveyed people on Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT), 
which has been shown to be closer to U.S. demographics than 
conventional convenience samples [5]. One potential concern 
is that people on AMT potentially represent a younger, more 
technologically  literate  population,  but  we  believe  this  is 
consistent with demographics of current self-trackers. 

further 

response  quality,  we 

We restricted participation to Turkers in the United States. 
restricted 
To  ensure 
participation to Turkers who had a task acceptance rate of at 
least  95%  and  had  completed  at  least  1,000  tasks.  We 
surveyed 200 Turkers, compensating each with $0.50 for a 
short  screener  survey  (less  than  2  minutes)  in  which  they 
indicated  all  (if  any)  self-tracking  tools  they  had  used 
previously.  Finally,  Turkers  were  presented  a  short  free 
response question that the first author analyzed for quality, a 
recommended  practice  in  AMT  surveys  [14].  We  rejected 
three  tasks  as  spam:  two  left  the  free  response  question 
effectively  blank  (e.g.,  “N/A”);  one  did  not  enter  a  code 
showing they had completed the survey. 

We  invited  each  Turker  who  had  self-tracked  in  a  domain 
(i.e.,  physical  activity,  location,  finances)  to  complete  a 
longer survey for that domain. They were compensated $2.00 
for  completing  the  approximately  15-minute  survey.  This 

733

 
 
Domain  Demographics 

N=105: 44 F, 
60 M, 1 FTM 

Temporal use 
(avg # tools) 

93 current (1.25) 

Physical 
Activity 

Finances 

Location 

Age: avg 31.47, 
min 19, max 63 

53 stopped (1.16) 

N=99: 46 F, 52 M, 
1 FTM 

96 current (1.58) 

Age: avg 33.46, 
min 19, max 70 

43 stopped (1.07) 

N=83: 36 F, 46 M, 
1 no answer 

80 current (1.86) 

Age: avg 30.75, 
min 19, max 70 

44 stopped (1.29) 

Tools Mentioned 
FitBit (19), MapMyRun (18), 
RunKeeper (13), MyFitnessPal (12), 
Nike+ (10) 
RunKeeper (12), MapMyRun (9), 
FitBit (8), Nike+ (8), 
MyFitnessPal (4) 
Spreadsheets (60), Credit Card 
tools (34), Mint (34), Quicken (11) 
Quicken (21), Mint (8), 
Spreadsheets (7), 
Credit Card tools (7) 
Facebook (56), Instagram (23), 
Google Latitude (19), Twitter (17), 
Foursquare (16), FindMyFriends (8)
Foursquare (24), Facebook (9), 
Google Latitude (7), Instagram (5), 
Twitter (5), FindMyFriends (4) 

Table 1. We surveyed demographically diverse participants
using a variety of tools in three distinct self-tracking domains.

means a single Turker could complete three surveys, one for 
each domain. 103, 95, and 83 Turkers completed the survey 
for physical activity, finances, and location (79.8%, 78.5%, 
76.1%  respectively  of  those  who  qualified),  plus  an 
additional two and four responses with no corresponding task 
for  physical  activity  and  finances.  We  believe  these 
responses came from Turkers who started the task on AMT, 
completed the survey, but did not submit the task before it 
expired (one hour after they started the task on AMT). 

In total, 168 unique people of the 169 eligible completed the 
full survey in at least one domain. We rejected two additional 
responses  (one  physical  activity,  one  location)  because  the 
Turker indicated they did not use any self-tracking tools in 
the full survey. A summary of the results and demographics 
from the survey can be found in Table 1. 

The  full  survey  consisted  of  free  response  questions  about 
each current and previous tool, asking why they started and 
stopped using that tool as appropriate. The first two authors 
affinity diagrammed these responses, identified themes, and 
then separately qualitatively coded the responses, iteratively 
refining codes through discussion. 

Interview Methods 
After completion of qualitative coding of the survey data, the 
first  two  authors  identified  questions  that  required  further 
in-depth  interviews  to  address.  Of Turkers who indicated in 
the survey that they were willing to be contacted for interviews, 
36 respondents were identified as having representative tracking 
motivations,  behaviors,  and  experiences  and  were  verbose  in 
responses,  of  which  6  responded.  We  supplemented  these 
interviews  with  another  16  recruited  through  university 
mailing lists and posts to social media. These interviewees 
were screened for the same criteria as the Turkers. 

Interviews lasted an average of 38 minutes (min 16, max 59) 
and  were  each  conducted  by  two  members  of  the  research 
team  (12  researchers  conducted 
total). 
9  interviewees identified as male, 13 as female. They ranged 
in age from 24 to 39 (mean: 29.7, median: 29.5). Interview 
participants were compensated with a $20 Amazon gift card. 
Interview  themes  were  identified  and  codes  were  created 

interviews 

in 

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

through a discussion with all interviewers. Two interviewers 
qualitatively  coded  each  interview,  with  codes  iteratively 
refined through discussion. 

The screener survey, full survey, and interview protocol are 
publicly available: https://github.com/depstein/lived-informatics 

Limitations 
We focused on three common, yet diverse, domains in which 
people self-track. People self-track in many other domains, 
including to manage chronic illnesses, in which people might 
have different motivations or tracking habits. Although we 
believe our findings are extensible to domains other than the 
three on which we report (e.g., biometric or food tracking), 
they do not necessarily cover all motivations and usages. 

Some  people  track  the  domains  we  study  using  different 
classes of tools that we do not extensively report on, such as 
tools that passively record location (e.g., Moves, SenseCam 
[17]).  Although  we  believe  this  suggests  these  are  used 
relatively  infrequently  compared  to  those  we  report  on 
(or  possible  limitations  in  our  recruitment  techniques),  our 
findings  on  tracking  in  a  particular  domain  may  not 
generalize to all tools or people tracking that type of data. 

We  believe  our  recruitment  overrepresents  people  who 
currently  identify  as  self-trackers,  as  our  recruitment 
materials  were  likely  to  draw  people  who  were  currently 
interested in self-tracking (e.g., posting the task on AMT as 
a  “Survey  on  Location,  Physical  Activity,  and  Finance 
Tracking”). This is one weakness of our research, and future 
work  should  further  explore  people’s  reasons  for  deciding 
not to return to tracking. 

DEVELOPMENT OF A LIVED INFORMATICS MODEL 
Based on results of our survey and interviews, we develop a 
new  model  of  personal  informatics  reflecting  a  “lived 
informatics” [34] view of usage. The stage-based model [21] 
assumes a desire for action, which we believe corresponds to 
the  behavior  change  nature  of  the  model  but  does  not 
encompass self-tracking motivated for other reasons. 

Furthermore, Li et al.’s model describes people switching to 
a  new  tool  when  their  current  tool  does  not  meet  their 
information needs [21]. We have found that people’s reasons 
for switching tools are more varied. The prior models also do 
not describe the ways in which and reasons why people  lapse 
in their tracking or stop entirely [11]. We integrate lapses and 
resumption into our model, which appears in Figure 2. 

Deciding to Track 
We divide the preparation stage of Li et al.’s model [21] into 
two stages: deciding and selecting. The deciding stage refers 
to the decision to track personal data. This stage mirrors the 
precontemplation and contemplation stages of the TTM for 
people with  a behavior change goal  [32]. People decide to 
track for varied reasons, including to see other’s activity, to 
share  activity  with  others,  to  receive  rewards,  or  curiosity. 
People can decide to track having never tracked before, or 
can return to tracking from a prior experience. 

734

 
 
 
 
 
SESSION: PERSUASIVE AND PERSONAL

Figure  2.  Our  lived  informatics  model  of  personal
informatics.  It  includes  the  process  of  deciding  to  track
and  selecting  tools,  tracking  and  acting  as  an  ongoing
process  of  collection,  integration,  and  reflection,  and
lapsing of tracking that may later be resumed. 

Selecting Tools 
Following  the  decision  to  track,  people  select  a  tool  with 
which to track. This is sometimes minimal or coupled with 
the decision to track (e.g., when someone received a tracking 
tool as a gift and decides to use it). This decision can also be 
difficult  and  require  extensive  comparison  of  tools  (e.g., 
online,  through  brief  use).  Tool  selection  can  depend  on 
features,  aesthetics,  and  convenience,  and  choices  can  be 
limited by the tracker’s mobile platform or budget. 

Tracking and Acting 
Choe [7] and Whooley et al. [41] suggest self-trackers learn 
about their behavior and make changes to their practices while 
they collect and integrate data (e.g., reflection-in-action [36]). 
We define this practice of tracking and acting as the ongoing 
process of collecting, integrating, and reflecting. These three 
activities are distinct and do have data dependencies, but in 
contrast to Li et al.’s model [21] we do not separate them into 
stages. These activities can and do occur simultaneously. 

Lapsing 
The lapsing stage occurs when someone stops actively using 
a self-tracking tool. Lapsing typically begins with barriers to 
collection, but can also be caused by barriers to integration 
or reflection [21]. We later describe four categories of lapses: 
forgetting,  upkeep,  skipping,  and  suspending.  For  some,  a 
lapse is a temporary break in tracking, while others do not 
return to tracking and have no intention to track again. 

Resuming 
Short-term lapses (e.g., forgetting to bring a pedometer on a 
weekend trip) often are followed by a quick resumption of 
tracking.  In  these  cases,  someone  may  not  revisit  their 
decision to track and the selection of a tool. 

After a longer lapse (e.g., stopping tracking for months), the 
self-tracker may not necessarily resume collecting more data. 

735

Instead, they may resume integrating or reflecting upon their 
previous  data,  deciding  later  whether  more  collection  is 
needed. This decision varies by the tracker and the domain.  

MODEL STAGES ACROSS DOMAINS 
In  this  section,  we  discuss  how  our  model  describes 
self-tracking across domains. We report on themes present 
across  all  three  domains  we  studied,  noting  exceptions 
specific  to  particular  tracking  domains.  We  believe  the 
similarities in tracking experiences across domains indicate 
the potential for the model’s applicability to other domains. 

This  section  contains  quotes  from  our  168  survey  and  22 
interview participants. We quote participants as p##, where 
p1-p22  were  interviewed  and  p16-p184  were  surveyed. 
Note this means that p16-p22 completed both. 

Different Motivations for Deciding to Track 
Most  models  of  personal  informatics  and  self-monitoring 
describe the practices of people who engage in self-tracking 
with  a  specific  behavior  change  goal  in  mind  [1,21,32]. 
Although this describes much self-tracking behavior, people 
also  begin  and  continue  to  self-track  for  reasons  not  well 
described  by  these  models.  We  describe  three  classes  of 
self-tracker motivations: behavior change, instrumentation, 
inform  how 
and  curiosity.  These 
self-trackers select, use, and lapse in tool usage. 

initial  motivations 

Behavior Change Goals 
Prior  work  has  described  how  behavior  change  goals  can 
motivate  someone  to  start  tracking  [15,19,22,34].  Personal 
informatics tools support principle and program-level goals 
in Powers’ categorization of goals [31]. Principle-level goals 
are relatively abstract and ideal guiding principles that one 
tries to attain, such as goals described by p5 “get in better 
shape”, p86 “to have more control over my finances”, and 92 
others.  Program  goals  are  more  specific  and  actionable 
(e.g., p89 “get[ting] out of debt”, 39 others). We identified 
48 financial trackers motivated to receive a financial touch 
[20],  such  as  p90  “just  wanted  a  clearer  snapshot  of  my 
finances.”  We  believe  such  trackers  intend  to  change  their 
behavior if they notice something they find concerning, such 
as p164 “[I] wanted to know if I should cut down on anything.” 

Even  when  people  track  to  aid  in  behavior  change,  they 
sometimes  track  primarily  to  gain  motivation  or  increase 
their accountability, rather than for insights or awareness of 
their own behavior [2]. p72 started tracking “because I felt I 
needed  to  get  more  motivation  for  my  fitness”,  while  p73 
tracked  finances  “to  be  accountable  with  how  I  spend  my 
money” (mentioned by 11 and 2 others respectively). Support 
for these goals may have different design requirements than 
supporting  informational  goals.  Adding  features  that  let 
people share progress may create channels for accountability 
[27,28], but merely having a record in the tool or online can 
also help motivate people and make them feel accountable to 
the  tool  [26].  For  some  people,  the  record’s  support  for 
accountability is more valuable than insights derived. 

 
 
 
Instrumental Tracking Goals 
We define instrumental tracking as tracking without the goal 
of changing a behavior. Instead, the goal is to obtain a record 
of a particular behavior, such as going to a particular place or 
watching a particular  movie. Some  are  motivated  to  track by 
rewards  that  data  about  their  behaviors  can  unlock,  such  as 
discounts or badges [24]. p162 started tracking his physical 
activity because he “got rewards points with my insurance”, 
an increasingly common trend for health insurers [29]. 

Location trackers often instrument to achieve social benefits. 
35 mentioned tracking to share where they went, including 
p173 for practical reasons, “I like to let friends know where I 
am in case I am in the area” and p42 for social engagement, 
“to get likes”. Others were motivated to start tracking to see 
where others were “my friends had it so I got it too to see 
where they were” (p107, 19 others). These social motivations 
often are related to other goals, such as p82 sharing to inform 
friends: “I ate at this Thai restaurant that I loved, so I wanted 
to share it with friends so they could check it out.” 

Curiosity 
Many people decide to track without any behavioral goal, but 
out of curiosity about what it would be like or would offer. 
People described thinking tracking would be “fun”, “cool”, 
“neat”,  and  wanted  to  “try  it  out”  (19,  12,  6,  5  people). 
Curiosity  is  often  driven  by  a  desire  to  keep  up  with  new 
technology, such as p68 trying Quicken because “it seemed 
like the latest way to keep up with my expenses.” Curiosity 
also  spread  socially,  such  as  for  p41  “everyone  was  using 
Foursquare and I thought I’d finally jump on a bandwagon.” 

Many phones and computers include self-tracking programs 
by  default,  such  as  Google  Now,  Apple  HealthKit,  and 
Quicken. People also start tracking because they receive apps 
and devices as gifts (10 people), they were free (7 people), 
or their “phone asked if I wanted to”, referring to the GPS 
tracking  permission  models  of  many  common  phone  apps 
(p63,  11  others).  These  events  often  make  people  curious 
enough  to  start  tracking,  such  as  for  p150:  “it  was  offered 
free of charge so I thought I’d give it a try.” 

Differences by Domain 
The  prevalence  of  tracking  motivations  varies  by  domain. 
Behavior  change  goals  were  common  reasons  for  physical 
activity  or  financial  tracking  (82%  and  73%  of  trackers), 
while  instrumental  tracking  was  a  major  motivator  for 
location trackers (67% of trackers). Curiosity was prevalent 
across  all  three  domains,  but  was  mentioned  by  more 
location  trackers  (10%,  6%,  and  20%  of  physical  activity, 
finances,  and  location  trackers).  Our  participants  used 
primarily socially-oriented location tracking tools. We expect 
goals  of  self-oriented  location  trackers  (e.g.,  location  diaries) 
would be more similar to physical activity or financial trackers. 

Selecting Tools to Support Tracking Motivation 
Rooksby  et  al.  describe  reasons  why  self-trackers  pick  tools, 
including recommendations, reading media articles, and online 
reviews [34]. We note the same practices.  Recommendations 
from  friends  (28  people)  or  family  and  significant  others 

736

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

(9  people)  were  the  most  common  means  of  selection. 
10 people mentioned online reviews, such as p7 “It was the 
first result on Amazon, and it had good reviews”.  

Trackers  motivated  by  behavior  change  try  to  select 
applications with features that best support their goals [16]. 
p177  chose  RunKeeper  because  it  integrated  with  another 
tool  he  was  already  using:  “it  works  well…  with  my  other 
app… Nexercise.” p78 needed a specific feature, “I wanted 
to be able to download and import my bank statements so I 
could keep track of my spending”, and decided Quicken best 
fit  his  needs.  Behavior  change  trackers  typically  do 
substantial background research when selecting a tool, such 
as  looking  at  many  reviews  “I  read  a  lot  of  tech  blogs… 
FitBit  has  consistently  gotten  really  good  reviews”  (p19, 
7 others). p5 and 2 others described seeking out opinions on 
tools from her social network: “a lot of times if I know that 
I’m looking for something new, I will quite often ask around 
on Facebook and such, ‘has anyone tried this’?” 

Instrumental trackers look to maximize benefit they receive 
from a tool based on social influence or potential rewards. 
For instrumental trackers who are tracking to see others or 
for others to see, selecting a tool is dependent on what tools 
others  use.  Location  tagging  on  large  social  networks  is 
popular  because  “everyone  else  is  using  it”  (p57)  and  it  is 
easy  to  engage  with  a  large  audience.  People  also  look  to 
maximize the rewards they receive, such as selecting a FitBit 
because it is supported by a work wellness program (p18). 

Trackers motivated by curiosity often do not actively think 
about selecting a tool, instead beginning to use whatever tool 
prompted  their  initial  curiosity.  Frequent  media  references 
led p154 to be curious about self-tracking: “I started using 
Apple HealthKit since there was hype in the media about how 
great this app is”, but it did not live up to his expectations 
“I used it for less than a week and was not impressed.” 

Using Tools for Value and Insight 
People with varied tracking motivations use tools differently 
during the collection, integration, and reflection stages of the 
personal  informatics  model  [21],  which  we  define  as  the 
practice  of  tracking  and  acting.  This  section  separately 
discusses how people collect, integrate, and reflect on data, 
but we reiterate that these processes occur simultaneously in 
practice.  We  report  on  and  discuss  differences  in  usage  in 
both self-tracking data and self-tracker motivation. 

Collection 
We notice a trend toward long-term use of current tracking 
tools (Figure 3), but people appear to abandon location and 
physical activity tracking tools more quickly than financial 
tracking tools (45% and 44% of people abandoned tools for 
location  and  physical  activity  within  three  months,  versus 
26%  for  financial  tools).  Respondents  also  used  location 
tracking  tools  less  frequently  than  other  tools  (Figure  4a), 
and  many  respondents  logged  physical  activity  every  day 
(Figure 4b). We infer that people have a daily or weekly habit 
of  collecting  their  finances  or  physical  activity,  while 

 
 
SESSION: PERSUASIVE AND PERSONAL

(a) 

(b) 

Figure 3. Respondents reported using financial tracking
tools  for  longer  than  other  tracking  tools,  and  were
quickest to abandon location tracking tools. 

location  tracking  appeared  more  intermittent.  However, 
many  participants  reported  having  not  used  their  tracking 
tools  in  the  past  week  (24%,  26%,  and  36%  of  physical 
activity, finances, and location trackers). 

People who track to support behavior change tend to collect 
data  frequently,  such  as  p21  “the  FitBit’s  on  every  day, 
almost 24 hours”. Behavior change trackers were bothered 
when records were not accurate “I had a few accounts that I 
could  never  get  added  properly…  it  was  an  inaccurate 
picture  of  our  finances”  (p19).  p162  wanted  credit  for  his 
activity “[my app] wouldn’t always acknowledge when I was 
at  the  gym”,  a  common  problem  in  prior  work  [8,16]. 
For  people  trying  to  maintain  a  level  of  activity,  accuracy 
was less important. p11 noted “I do keep an eye on trends. If 
I’m trending negative, or trending positive in my accounts”, 
and  emphasized  trying  to  keep  his  spending  constant. 
Kay et al. previously noted trends matter more than accuracy 
for people who were trying to maintain, not lose, weight [19]. 

Financial trackers typically have behavior change motivations, 
and  their  usage  of  tools  reflects  this.  45%  of  financial 
trackers  reported  using  their  current  tool  for  at  least  two 
years, with 73% reporting having used their tool within the 
past week. 63% of our financial trackers were currently using 
spreadsheets,  which  require  substantial  manual  entry.  This 
level  of  sustained  and  frequent  engagement  with  financial 
tracking  is  notable  given  the  high  burdens  of  data  entry 
relative to our other domains. Kaye et al. suggest people are 
willing to exert this effort to manage their finances and often 
prefer it to using financial aggregation tools [20]. 

Instrumental  trackers  tend  to  engage  in  tracking  when  the 
benefits of doing so exceed the costs, such as the effort to 
record activities or to remember to charge and wear a device. 
For  p143,  this  meant  tracking  when  he  was  somewhere 
interesting:  “to  brag  about  a  cool  place  I’m  at  like 
Disneyworld.” p18 was motivated to track by the incentives 
of  her  health  insurance  plan,  and  she  continues  because 
“I get rewards [from my health insurance plan] for making 
so many steps a day and for logging my food daily.” 

737

Figure 4. Respondents (a) often make daily or weekly use 
of physical activity and financial tools, while (b) location 
tools were typically used less than twice in the past week.

The  frequency  with  which  curiosity-driven  trackers  collect 
data  is  inconsistent,  and  depends  on  how  compelling  they 
find the data they track. Many curiosity-motivated trackers 
will discover another value to tracking and increase their tool 
use,  such  as  p85,  who  started  location  tracking  because  it 
“was  a  trendy  thing  to  do,  but  later  on  I've  realized  its 
benefits.” p132 started tracking physical activity because an 
app came preinstalled on his phone, and later realized the app 
was “an ideal tool to record my physical activity.” 

Location  trackers  tended  to  have  motivations  that  were 
instrumental  or  curious,  use  their  tracking  tools  less 
frequently (only 49% report tracking in the past week), and 
abandon  tracking  most  quickly  (18%  of  past  trackers  used 
their  tool  for  less  than  one  week).  We  note  that  75%  of 
current location trackers report using their tools for at least a 
year, which we believe coincides with the feature’s inclusion 
in popular social network applications. 

Integration 
People integrate self-tracking data to help make sense of it. 
Integration can be trivial or time-consuming, depending on 
how  much  responsibility  the  person  bears  in  preparing  the 
collected data for reflection [21]. Many of the tools used by 
our  self-trackers  do  not  require  integration,  such  as  for 
MapMyRun, “there is this whole dashboard on the website” 
(p16).  For  some  behavior  change  tools,  such  as  Mint,  the 
purpose of the application is integration: “I thought it would 
be beneficial  to have all my finances  in one  place and  see 
what I spend my money on” (p178). 

For instrumental trackers, it is important the data they track 
integrate  into  the  system  that  provides  the  corresponding 
benefits. Tracking location for social reasons is only valuable 
if it the people a tracker cares about can see it. For p6, it was 
important to select a tracker that integrates with his insurance 
program. He describes the integration process: “FitBit sends 
[my data] to the health plan, then you can view it through the 
health  plan’s  app  to  track  your  progress.”  Trackers 
motivated  by  curiosity  in  our  study  did  not  describe  any 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

tool for a month or more. We believe people still see themselves 
as  trackers  and  participate  in  the  underlying  behavior.  p30 
identified  he  was  no  longer  tracking,  and  when  asked  why  he 
stopped tracking, he stated, “technically, I haven’t [stopped] – I 
am just in between usages…” 

Participants  in  our  study  described  four  types  of  lapses: 
forgetting, upkeep, skipping, and suspending. We discuss the 
causes  of  each  of  these  lapses  and  how  they  manifest. 
Lapsing may be intentional or unintentional, and may or may 
not lead to stopping entirely. 

Forgetting.  People  do  not  always  remember  to  use  their 
tracking tools, or cannot use them, regardless of their original 
motivations for tracking. p13 states she “never purposefully 
stopped using” her FitBit, but she has “left it in a coworkers 
car  after  happy  hour  once.  That  was  embarrassing.” 
Substantial personal informatics research has explored how 
to  reduce  the  likelihood  of  forgetting,  including  providing 
reminders [4] and  automatically  sensing behaviors  that  are 
typically journaled [33,39]. 

Although  forgetting  typically  results  in  a  short-term  lapse, 
people may decide that tracking is not worth the trouble after 
forgetting  several  times.  p177  stopped  using  RunKeeper, 
explaining: “[I] haven’t used it as much as I would want to. 
I guess I forget to use it.” p3 mentions falling out of the habit: 
“I just didn’t make it a habit and then kind of forgot about it.” 

Upkeep.  Devices  and  tools  often  require  maintenance  to 
continue  tracking.  The  simplest  example  is  charging  the 
battery of a wearable device. 8 people mentioned forgetting 
to charge their devices, leaving them without tracking for an 
extended period of time. When talking about her FitBit, p19 
said,  “right  now  it’s  out  of  battery  so  I  haven’t  used  it  all 
week.” Although she intends to continue using it, she often 
needs a reminder to resume tracking: “I’ll probably charge it 
tonight, just because we’re talking about it.” 

Upkeep  becomes  a  barrier  to  success  for  behavior  change 
trackers. p19, who used spreadsheets to track her finances, 
said “we just kind of stopped updating it because it was too 
much  work  to  keep  up  to  date”,  with  p174  adding  that  he 
“grew  tired  of  managing  it.”  For  curiosity-driven  trackers, 
upkeep  becomes  a  barrier  to  usage.  p20  wanted  to  use  the 
lifelogging app Saga, “It would log everything… that sounds 
exactly like I’d wanted”, but gave up quickly because “I felt 
it was eating too much of my battery.” 

Skipping.  People  make  the  decision  not  to  log  everything 
they track. Sometimes, they already know the data and do not 
see the benefit: “I run this one little loop that I already know 
the distance, so I don’t really bother with keeping track on 
the app” (p11). p20 mentions that some locations represent 
events too private to record: “some of these appointments are 
personal private things… ‘do I check in publicly so that I can 
keep track?’” The desire to maintain a complete record is in 
tension with privacy in systems that emphasize sharing. 

(a) 

(b) 

Figure 5. Respondents (a) often reviewed physical activity
data  at  least  weekly,  while  (b)  the  majority  of  location
trackers had not reviewed their data in the past week. 

integration work, but prior work has shown integration can 
surface habits self-trackers want to know more about [15]. 

Reflection 
Our  survey  respondents  reported  reviewing  their  physical 
activity most regularly (Figure 5a), and most current trackers 
did not review their location in the past 7 days (Figure 5b). 
Financial trackers reported reviewing weekly (35% and 33% 
of current and past trackers), while location trackers reported 
reviewing once a month or less (44% and 45% of current and 
past trackers). We note some respondents across all domains 
made a daily habit out of reviewing their data (20%, 12%, 
and 4% of physical activity, financial, and location trackers 
reported reviewing their data every day for the past 7 days). 

Behavior change oriented trackers regularly reviewed their 
data, such as p22 “I usually log on to Mint almost every day. 
Sometimes I check a couple times a day when I am expecting 
a big expense”. Physical activity trackers reviewed their data 
most frequently (e.g., “I guess I would check in pretty much 
daily on how many steps I had taken, maybe 2 or 3 times a 
day” p17), while aggregation across a week or month may be 
enough for to receive value from financial data. 

Instrumental  and  curiosity-driven  trackers  tend  not  to 
frequently review or reflect on their data, such as p2 “I would 
say  a  couple  of  times  a  week.  Not  that  frequently”.  For 
instrumental-motivated trackers, the act of tracking is more 
important than looking back later, “it’s just about entering it 
in that moment” (p16). 

Four Categories of Lapsing 
15%, 14%, and 17% of physical activity, finances, and location 
trackers identified as current trackers despite having not used their 

738

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SESSION: PERSUASIVE AND PERSONAL

People  also  skip  tracking  entries  when  the  entry  is  too 
difficult, such as entering every ingredient in a recipe [11]. 
This  difficulty  led  p16  to  stop  tracking  food  entirely  “what 
caused me to stop is that… you have to break down every single 
thing you eat into all these component ingredients.” 

Suspending.  People  temporarily  suspend  tracking  because 
they do not need or want to track a time period. p122 stopped 
using  Nike+  because  of  the  holidays:  “the  holidays  and 
family visiting me has stopped me from using it.” p12 does 
not food journal while she is on vacation: “I put [entries] in 
MyFitnessPal every single day, except if I’m on a holiday or 
something.”  p6  notes  that  he  has  “taken  breaks  during  the 
winter  season  from  [activity]  tracking.”  p180  describes 
taking  a  break  from  Mint  and  later  returning:  “because  I 
didn’t really have the financial need for it at the time—not much 
money was coming in. But I recently started using it again”. 

Suspending tracking differs from suspending the activity that 
is  being  tracked.  Examples  of  suspending  activities  include 
injuries  (e.g.,  “I  got  injured  and  stopped  running”  p106, 
“I  stopped  running due  to  knee  injury” p16)  or  changing  life 
habits “I travel less now” (p46). For these examples, the tracking 
tool  is  no  longer  relevant  to  the  person.  Although  these 
suspensions may be temporary and may appear the same from 
the  perspective  of  what  data  is  captured,  this  distinction  is 
important in how people think about and use their tools. 

Transitioning to a New Tool 
Self-trackers regularly transition to new tools. In our survey, 
53%,  72%,  and  78%  of  physical  activity,  finances,  and 
location trackers had used more than one tool. Changes are 
sometimes forced by reasons outside of tool selection, such 
as changing phones ([34], “I switched mobile platforms” p22, 
3 others) or because the tool stopped being supported (e.g., 
“Microsoft  Money  quit  supporting  their  software”  p77,  5 
others). We focus on people choosing to stop using a tool and 
beginning to use another, with or without a lapse in between. 

As suggested by Li et al., behavior change motivated trackers 
switch to tools that better meet their information needs [21]. 
25  people  described  switching  to  a  new  tool  that  was 
“better”,  such  as  p186  switching  from  Quicken  “someone 
recommended MoneyDance and I liked it a lot better” and 
p95 
from  RunKeeper  “found  a  better  alternative 
(MapMyRun).” People often describe what is better about a 
new tool in terms of features (e.g., “I wanted a more robust 
that  would  keep  my  weight  and  body 
app  option 
measurements” p47, 12 others), ease of use (e.g., “I like my 
online banking app better and it is easier” p72), or accuracy 
(e.g., “I upgraded to a smartphone with data that could track 
my actual location and track more accurately” p54). 

Trackers  motivated  by  behavior  change  often  use  and 
compare multiple tools at once, then decide what tool they 
prefer.  When  p5  decided  to  try  switching  from  an  analog 
pedometer  to a  FitBit,  she wore both of  them:  “I  put  them 
both  on  to  see  what  the  FitBit  would  be  like  and  compare 
them” and later returned the FitBit because it was “way off in 

739

comparison.” p121 started using their bank’s tracking tools 
“to compare it to other software tools”, but later decided that 
other tools were better and stopped using her bank tools. 

For instrumental trackers, tool switching often occurs when 
a new tool offers more benefits. p57 switched from location 
tagging  on  Facebook  to  Twitter  and  Instagram  because 
“everyone moved on to other social media platforms… so I 
followed those trends instead.” p6 described using multiple 
pedometers at once, because his health plan would “pick the 
best numbers from all of those”, before settling on the one 
that gave the largest rewards. 

We  did  not  observe  many  instances  of  curiosity-motivated 
trackers  switching  tools,  perhaps  because  use  of  one  tool 
tended to satisfy their curiosity. After trying tracking, some 
of  these  trackers  developed  behavior  change  goals  and 
switched tools that better matched their new goals. 

Stopping Tracking 
Although  extended  or  repeated  lapses  often  lead  people  to 
stop  tracking,  people  also  stop  tracking  for  other  reasons. 
Some trackers motivated by behavior change stop tracking 
when they successfully change the behavior, and move on to 
maintaining  their  desired behavior  [32].  p142  and 2 others 
stopped  tracking  because  they  “met  my  weight  goal.” 
For others, the behavior change is no longer necessary, “I’m 
not  as  financially  strapped  as  when  I  was  using  Mint,  so 
that’s a big reason why I stopped using it” (p15). 

Instrumental  trackers  stop  tracking when  the  benefits from 
instrumenting  fade  or  are  withdrawn.  p164  stopped  using 
Foursquare because “the possibility of deals wasn’t enticing 
enough.”  For  many  social-oriented  location  trackers,  this 
occurs when others stop using the tool: “everyone else stopped 
using it” (p170, 10 others). However, some people who start 
as  instrumental  trackers  find  other  benefits  for  tracking. 
Although  p18  would  not  have  purchased  her  FitBit  except 
for her work wellness program, she said she would continue 
to use it if the wellness program no longer supported it. 

Some motivated to track by curiosity stop when that curiosity 
fades.  p109  stopped  using  Foursquare  when  “the  novelty 
wore off” and p72 stopped using Google Latitude because “it 
was  boring.”  p27  and  2  others  described  starting  to  track 
because  they  “like  new  technology”,  and  may  have  moved 
onto a new curiosity when the novelty of the tool faded. 

Stopping  tracking  is  not  necessarily  a  permanent  decision, 
and people sometimes return to tracking. Finding a new tool 
to integrate with may motivate someone to resume tracking. 
p20 stopped using Foursquare because there was “less of a 
motivation to check in”, but later resumed because she “got 
a  Pebble  and  you  can  check  in  on  Foursquare  from  your 
Pebble.” People also return to tools when their goals align 
with what the tools can support. p18 used MyFitnessPal to 
help  her  lose weight,  lost  interest  in  the  tool,  and  resumed 
using MyFitnessPal to help with weight loss two years later. 

 
 
DISCUSSION 
Our revised model of personal informatics offers guidance and 
design  challenges  for  the  personal  informatics  community. 
Some  guidelines  are  consistent  with  those  suggested  by 
Rooksby et al., including to consider the agency of people 
and how they want to self-track [34]. We supplement these 
guidelines  by  recommending  that  designers  plan  for  lapse 
and  resumption,  consider  people  migrating  between  tools, 
and support people adjusting their tracking goals. 

Returning to Tracking with the Same Tool after a Lapse 
It  is  unclear how personal  informatics  tools  should behave 
when  someone  decides  to  resume  use  after  a  lapse.  A 
person’s historical data may be helpful for setting new goals, 
such  as  defining  a  new  budget  based  on  their  previous 
spending  habits.  However,  seeing  historical  data  (and 
potential failures surfaced) may be demotivating for someone 
looking to resume use of a calorie-tracking app to lose weight. 
Historical  data  offers  opportunities  to  bootstrap  the  data 
collection process, but its use requires careful consideration. 

Some self-tracking tools passively collect information for as 
long  as  the  tool  is  not  disabled  or  uninstalled  (e.g.,  Apple 
HealthKit, Moves, Mint). Although someone may not look 
at their data for months or even years, the tool continues to 
collect  and  store  their  information.  It  is  unclear  what,  if 
anything,  the  tool  should do with  this historical  data  when 
someone  resumes  using  the  tool  after  an  extended  lapse. 
Although  prior  research  has  considered  the  challenge  of 
presenting  a  large  amount  of  personal  data  in  an  easily 
consumable  manner  [3,15],  it  remains  unclear  how  to 
summarize this data based on the reason the person resumed 
tracking. Furthermore, perhaps the passively collected data 
should  not  be  summarized  at  all.  Instead,  the  person  may 
want  start  over  with  a  clean  slate,  and  looking  at  their 
previous  data  may  create  a  negative  reaction  if  they  view 
their previous tracking experience as a failure. 

Effective Migration between Tools 
When  describing  design  choices  for  assistive  technology, 
Dawe  notes  the  difficulty  in  replacing  broken  or  outdated 
technology, particularly with regards to cost [13]. Although 
many tools are free, some self-trackers are concerned with 
the  cost  of  others.  Loss  can  cause  a  lapse  when  someone 
cannot  afford  a  replacement,  such  as  FitBit  wearer  p155 
“it got lost or stolen and I didn’t want to spend the money to 
replace  [it]”  and  Quicken  user  p53  “it  costs  money,  and  I 
realized I could do everything I wanted with Excel.” More 
commonly,  people  change  their  motivation  and  needs  for 
tracking, such that tools no longer support the new needs. 

Although  some  self-trackers  are  not  concerned  with 
abandoning  tools  and  the  data  they  have  collected,  others 
avoid  switching  tools,  even  when  a  better  tool  exists.  p11 
describes why he avoids switching tools: 

I try to avoid it as much as possible… When you transition from 
tools,  there’s  a  lot  of  transaction  costs  in  terms  of  switching 
between one and the other. You just have to get your profile set 
up  again,  you  have  to  learn  to  interact  with  a  tool.  There’s 

740

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

potential data loss. I don’t know if that matters, sometimes it 
does, but usually it’s something that I just kind of gave up on. 

The overhead of setting up a profile, learning a new interface, 
and  losing  his  data  were  too  much  for  p11  to  consider 
switching  tools.  While  he  desires  other  features,  saying 
“I want to have an aggregate sense of how many miles I’ve 
run for the past three months”, he is unwilling to switch to a 
new  tool  and  lose  all  of  his  built-up  knowledge.  Although 
lock-in  may  be  desirable  from  an  application  or  device 
manufacturer’s  point  of  view,  personal  informatics  tools 
could  better  support  their  users  with  designs  that  support 
evolving motivations and feature needs and allow people to 
migrate when the tool no longer best supports their goals. 

Supporting Migration between Goals 
Some  curiosity  and  instrumentally-motivated  participants 
found other benefits from their tracking tools that motivated 
their  sustained  tracking  even  as  they  satisfied  their  initial 
curiosity or as the instrumental benefits faded. Others did not 
find  such  alternative  benefits.  This  suggests  that  designers 
may  be  able  to  do  more  to  help  people  see  benefits  in 
continuing to track. This might include realizing the value of 
tracking to support behavior change goals they already have, 
or even setting new goals. For example, an app that someone 
starts to use out of curiosity regarding how active they are 
could illustrate benefits achieved by others who started from 
the same activity level and walked a bit more each week. 

In  other  cases,  data  from  personal  informatics  applications 
may prompt people to question their behavior. For example, 
someone who tracks their location to share with friends or 
receive discounts might receive a badge for eating out often, 
or realize they check-in at restaurants much more than their 
friends, and wonder how much they could save by cooking. 

CONCLUSION 
We  offer  a  model  of  personal  informatics  informed  by  the 
perspective  of  lived  informatics,  expanding  upon  prior 
models based primarily in behavior change and maintenance. 
We identify three initial motivations for tracking: the desire 
to  change  behavior,  instrumenting  for  rewards  or  social 
engagement,  and  curiosity  regarding  data  and  habits. 
Our model captures the practices of self-trackers with such 
diverse goals, offers a better understanding of how they use 
self-tracking  tools,  and  helps  surface  relatively  unexplored 
challenges for future designers and researchers. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank Kelly Campbell, Monica Caraway, Season Dai, Yoanna 
Dosouto,  Nicole  Fugere,  Coimbra  Jackson,  Bradley  Jacobson, 
Chuck Johnston, Kim Lambert, Alex Pease, Sreedev Sidharthan, 
Maria  Suhardi,  Megan  Taylor,  and  Frank  Xu  for  their 
contributions  through  survey  design  and  participant  interviews. 
We  also  thank  Elena  Agapie,  Elizabeth  Bales,  Lucas  Franco 
Colusso, Felicia Cordeiro, and Ravi Karkar for early feedback and 
design  of  visuals.  This  work  is  sponsored  in  part  by  the  Intel 
Science and Technology Center for Pervasive Computing, Nokia 
Research, the AHRQ under award 1R21HS023654, and the NSF 
under awards OAI-1028195 and SCH-1344613. 

 
 
SESSION: PERSUASIVE AND PERSONAL

REFERENCES 
1.  Bandura, A. Social Cognitive Theory of Self-Regulation. 

J Organ Behav Hum Dec, 50 (1991), 248-287. 
2.  Baumer, E.P.S., Khovanskaya, V., Matthews, M., 
Reynolds, L., Sosik, V.S., and Gay, G. Reviewing 
Reflection: On the Use of Reflection in Interactive 
System Design. DIS 2014, 93-102. 

3.  Bentley, F., Tollmar, K., Stephenson, P., Levy, L., 

Jones, B., Robertson, S., Price, E., Catrambone, R., and 
Wilson, J. Health Mashups : Presenting Statistical 
Patterns between Wellbeing Data and Context in 
Natural Language to Promote Behavior Change. 
TOCHI 20, 5 (2013), 1-27. 

4.  Bentley, F. and Tollmar, K. The Power of Mobile 

Notifications to Increase Wellbeing Logging Behavior. 
CHI 2013, 1095-1098. 

5.  Berinsky, A.J., Huber, G.A., and Lenz, G.S. Evaluating 
Online Labor Markets for Experimental Research: 
Amazon.com’s Mechanical Turk. Political Analysis 20, 
(2012), 351-368. 

6.  Choe, E.K., Lee, N.B., Lee, B., Pratt, W., and Kientz, 
J.A. Understanding Quantified-Selfers’ Practices in 
Collecting and Exploring Personal Data. CHI 2014, 
1143-1152. 

7.  Choe, E.K. Designing Self-Monitoring Technology to 

Promote Data Capture and Reflection. PhD Dissertation. 
The Information School, University of Washington, 
Seattle Washington. 

8.  Consolvo, S., Everitt, K., Smith, I., and Landay, J.A. 

Design Requirements for Technologies that Encourage 
Physical Activity. CHI 2006, 457-466. 

9.  Consolvo, S., Smith, I.E., Matthews, T., LaMarca, A., 
and Tabert, J. Location Disclosure to Social Relations: 
Why, When, & What People Want to Share. CHI 2005, 
81-90. 

10.  Cordeiro, F., Bales, E., Cherry, E., and Fogarty, J. 
Rethinking the Mobile Food Journal: Exploring 
Opportunities for Lightweight Photo-Based Capture. 
CHI 2015, 3207-3216. 

11.  Cordeiro, F., Epstein, D.A., Thomaz, E., Bales, E., 

Jagannathan, A.K., Abowd, G.D., and Fogarty, J. 
Barriers and Negative Nudges : Exploring Challenges 
in Food Journaling. CHI 2015, 1159-1162. 

12.  Curmi, F., Ferrario, M.A., Southern, J., and Whittle, J. 
HeartLink : Open Broadcast of Live Biometric Data to 
Social Networks. CHI 2013, 1749-1758. 

13.  Dawe, M. Desperately Seeking Simplicity: How 

Young Adults with Cognitive Disabilities and Their 
Families Adopt Assistive Technologies. CHI 2006, 
1143-1152. 

14.  Downs, J.S., Holbrook, M.B., Sheng, S., and Cranor, L.F. 
Are your Participants Gaming the System? Screening 
Mechanical Turk Workers. CHI 2010, 2399-2402. 

15.  Epstein, D.A., Cordeiro, F., Bales, E., Fogarty, J., and 

Munson, S.A. Taming Data Complexity in Lifelogs: 
Exploring Visual Cuts of Personal Informatics Data. 
DIS 2014, 667-676. 

16.  Fritz, T., Huang, E.M., Murphy, G.C., and 

Zimmermann, T. Persuasive Technology in the Real 
World : A Study of Long-Term Use of Activity 
Sensing Devices for Fitness. CHI 2014, 487-496. 

17.  Hodges, S., Williams, L., Berry, E., Izadi, S., 

Srinivasan, J., Butler, A., Smyth, G., Kapur, N., and 
Wood, K. SenseCam: A Retrospective Memory Aid. 
UbiComp 2006, 177-193. 

18.  Humphreys, L. Mobile Social Networks and Social 

Practice: A Case Study of Dodgeball. J Compu-Mediat 
Comm 13, (2007), 341-360. 

19.  Kay, M., Morris, D., schraefel, m.c., and Kientz, J.A. 

There’s No Such Thing as Gaining a Pound: 
Reconsidering the Bathroom Scale User Interface. 
UbiComp 2013, 401-410. 

20.  Kaye, J.J., Mccuistion, M., Gulotta, R., and Shamma, 
D.A. Money Talks: Tracking Personal Finances. 
CHI  2014, 521-530. 

21.  Li, I., Dey, A., and Forlizzi, J. A Stage-Based Model of 
Personal Informatics Systems. CHI 2010, 557-566. 
22.  Li, I., Dey, A.K.A., and Forlizzi, J. Understanding My 

Data, Myself: Supporting Self-Reflection with 
Ubicomp Technologies. UbiComp 2011, 405-414. 
23.  Lin, J.J., Mamykina, L., Lindtner, S., Delajoux, G., and 
Strub, H.B. Fish’n'Steps: Encouraging Physical Activity 
with an Interactive Computer Game. UbiComp 2006, 
261-278. 

24.  Lindqvist, J., Cranshaw, J., Wiese, J., Hong, J., and 

Zimmerman, J. I’m the Mayor of My House: Examining 
Why People Use Foursquare-A Social-Driven Location 
Sharing Application. CHI 2011, 2409-2418. 
25.  Maitland, J. and Chalmers, M. Designing for Peer 

Involvement in Weight Management. CHI 2011, 315-324. 
26.  Munson, S.A. and Consolvo, S. Exploring Goal-Setting, 
Rewards, Self-Monitoring, and Sharing to Motivate 
Physical Activity. PervasiveHealth 2012, 25-32. 

27.  Munson, S.A., Krupka, E., Richardson, C., and 
Resnick, P. Effects of Public Commitments and 
Accountability in a Technology-Supported Physical 
Activity Intervention. CHI 2015, 1135-1144. 

28.  Newman, M., Lauterbach, D., Munson, S.A., Resnick, 

P., and Morris, M.E. “It’s not that I don't have 
problems, I'm just not putting them on Facebook”: 
Challenges and Opportunities in Using Online Social 
Networks for Health. CSCW 2011, 341-350. 
29.  Olson, P. Wearable Tech is Plugging into Health 

Insurance. Forbes. 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/parmyolson/2014/06/19/ 
wearable-tech-health-insurance/. 

741

 
 
UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

30.  Page, X. and Kobsa, A. Navigating the Social Terrain 
with Google Latitude. iConference 2010, 174-178. 

31.  Powers, W.T. Behavior: The Control of Perception. 

Benchmark Publications, 2005. 

32.  Prochaska, J.O. and Velcier, W.F. The Transtheoretical 

Model of Health Behavior Change. American Journal 
of Health Promotion 12, 1 (1997), 38-48. 

33.  Rahman, T., Adams, A.T., Zhang, M., Cherry, E., 

Zhou, B., Peng, H., and Choudhury, T. BodyBeat : A 
Mobile System for Sensing Non-Speech Body Sounds. 
MobiSys 2014, 2-13. 

34.  Rooksby, J., Rost, M., Morrison, A., and Chalmers, M. 
Personal Tracking as Lived Informatics. CHI 2014, 
1163-1172. 

35.  Schoenebeck, S.Y. Giving up Twitter for Lent: How 
and Why We Take Breaks from Social Media. 
CHI 2014, 773-782. 

36.  Schön, D.A. The Reflective Practitioner. Basic Books, 

1983. 

37.  Smith, I., Consolvo, S., Lamarca, A., Hightower, J., 
Scott, J., Sohn, T., Hughes, J., Iachello, G., and 
Abowd, G.D. Social Disclosure of Place: From 
Location Technology to Communication Practices. 
Pervasive 2005, 134-151. 

38.  Tang, K.P., Lin, J., Hong, J.I., Siewiorek, D.P., and 

Sadeh, N. Rethinking Location Sharing: Exploring the 
Implications of Social-Driven vs. Purpose-Driven 
Location Sharing. UbiComp 2010, 85-94. 

39.  Thomaz, E., Zhang, C., Essa, I., and Abowd, G.D. 

Inferring Meal Eating Activities in Real World Settings 
from Ambient Sounds: A Feasibility Study. IUI 2015, 
427-431. 

40.  Toscos, T., Faber, A., Connelly, K., and Upoma, A.M. 

Encouraging Physical Activity in Teens: Can 
Technology Help Reduce Barriers to Physical Activity 
in Adolescent Girls? PervasiveHealth 2008, 218-221. 
41.  Whooley, M., Gray, K., Ploderer, B., and Gray, K. On 

the Integration of Self-tracking Data amongst 
Quantified Self Members. HCI 2014, 151-160.  

742

 
 
 
