A Stage-Based Model of Personal Informatics Systems 
Ian Li1, Anind Dey1, and Jodi Forlizzi1,2 
1Human Computer Interaction Institute, 2School of Design 
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
ianli@cmu.edu, {anind, forlizzi}@cs.cmu.edu 

ABSTRACT 
People  strive  to  obtain  self-knowledge.  A  class  of  systems 
called  personal  informatics  is  appearing  that  help  people 
collect and reflect on personal information. However, there 
is no comprehensive list of problems that users experience 
using  these  systems,  and  no  guidance  for  making  these 
systems  more  effective.  To  address  this,  we  conducted 
surveys and interviews with people who collect and reflect 
on  personal  information.  We  derived  a  stage-based  model 
of  personal  informatics  systems  composed  of  five  stages  
(preparation, collection, integration, reflection, and action) 
and  identified  barriers  in  each  of  the  stages.  These  stages 
have  four  essential  properties:  barriers  cascade  to  later 
stages;  they  are  iterative;  they  are  user-driven  and/or 
system-driven;  and  they  are  uni-faceted  or  multi-faceted. 
From 
that  personal 
informatics  systems  should  1)  be  designed  in  a  holistic 
manner across the stages; 2) allow iteration between stages; 
3)  apply  an  appropriate  balance  of  automated  technology 
and  user  control  within  each  stage  to  facilitate  the  user 
experience; and 4) explore support for associating multiple 
facets of people’s lives to enrich the value of systems. 

these  properties,  we  recommend 

Author Keywords 
Personal informatics, collection, reflection, model, barriers 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m.  Information  interfaces  and  presentation  (e.g.,  HCI): 
Miscellaneous.  

General Terms 
Design, Human Factors 

INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION 
The  importance  of  knowing  oneself  has  been  known  since 
ancient  times.  Ancient  Greeks  who  pilgrimaged  to  the 
Temple  of  Apollo  at  Delphi  to  find  answers  were  greeted 
with  the  inscription  “Gnothi  seauton”  or  “Know  thyself”. 
To  this  day,  people  still  strive  to  obtain  self-knowledge. 
One way to obtain self-knowledge is to collect information 
about  oneself—one’s  behaviors,  habits,  and  thoughts—and 
reflect  on  them.  Computers  can  facilitate  this  activity 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
CHI 2010, April 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, Georgia, USA. 
Copyright 2010 ACM  978-1-60558-929-9/10/04....$10.00. 

to 

information  brought  by 

because  of  advances  in  sensor  technologies,  ubiquity  of 
the  Internet,  and 
access 
improvements  in  visualizations.  A  class  of  systems  called 
personal  informatics  is  appearing  that  help  people  collect 
and 
(e.g.,  Mint, 
http://mint.com, for finance and Nike+, http://nikeplus.com, 
for physical activity). 

reflect  on  personal 

information 

inform  people  about 

Personal informatics represents an interesting area of study 
in  human-computer  interaction.  First,  these  systems  help 
people  better  understand  their  behavior.  While  many 
technologies  inform  people  about  the  world,  personal 
informatics  systems 
themselves. 
Second,  people  participate  in  both  the  collection  of 
behavioral  information  as  well  as  the  exploration  and 
understanding  of  the  information.  This  poses  demands  on 
users that need to be explored. Finally, we do not know all 
the  problems  that  people  may  experience  with  personal 
informatics  systems.  We  know  that  people  want  to  get 
information about themselves to reflect on, and that systems 
that support this activity need to be effective and simple to 
use.  Identifying  problems 
in 
collecting and making sense of personal information while 
using such systems is critical for designing and developing 
effective personal informatics. 

that  people  experience 

To  date,  there  is  no  comprehensive  list  of  problems  that 
users experience using these systems. Toward this end, we 
conducted  surveys  and  interviews  with  people  who  collect 
and reflect on personal information. From this, we derived a 
model of personal informatics systems organized by stages, 
which emphasizes the interdependence of the different parts 
of personal informatics systems.  

We  provide  three  main  contributions  in  this  paper:  1)  we 
identify  problems  across  personal  informatics  tools,  2)  we 
introduce and discuss a model that improves the diagnosis, 
in  personal 
assessment,  and  prediction  of  problems 
informatics  systems,  and  3)  we  make  recommendations 
about  how  to  improve  existing  systems  and  build  new  and 
effective personal informatics systems.  

to 

In  the  next  section,  we  provide  a  working  definition  of 
personal  informatics  and  review  related  literature.  We 
present  the  method  and  findings  from  our  survey,  and  use 
them 
introduce  a  stage-based  model  of  personal 
informatics  systems.  We  describe  the  barriers  encountered 
in  each  stage  and  highlight  opportunities  for  intervention 
within  each  stage.  We  also  compare  and  analyze  existing 
systems to demonstrate the use of the model for diagnosing 

CHI 2010: Performance, Stagecraft, and MagicApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA557 
 
 
and  assessing  problems.  We  conclude  with  a  discussion  of 
design  guidelines  for  personal  informatics  systems  and 
directions for future research. 

A Definition of Personal Informatics 
Collecting  information  about  oneself  and  reflecting  on  the 
information  has  a  long  history.  Benjamin  Franklin  tracked 
the days in which he accomplished one of his 13 virtues for 
60  years  [5].  Buckminster  Fuller  documented  every  15 
minutes of his life in a scrapbook he called the “Dymaxion 
Chronofile”.  These  days,  there  are  people  like  Nicholas 
Felton,  who  has  been  publishing  annual  reports  about 
himself since 2005 (http://feltron.com), and Ellie Harrison, 
who  created  art  projects  on  her  personal  behavior,  such  as 
food  consumption  and  sneezes  (http://ellieharrison.com). 
These  are  extreme  examples,  but  regular  people  are 
tracking one or two types of personal information and using 
computing  technology  in  the  form  of  personal  informatics 
systems to do so. 

We  define  personal  informatics  systems  as  those  that  help 
people  collect  personally  relevant  information  for  the 
purpose  of  self-reflection  and  gaining  self-knowledge. 
There  are  two  core  aspects  to  every  personal  informatics 
system:  collection  and 
reflection.  Effective  personal 
the  necessary 
informatics  systems  help  users  collect 
personal  information  for  insightful  reflection.  Personal 
informatics  goes  by  other  names,  such  as  “living  by 
numbers”,  “quantified  self”,  “self-surveillance”,  “self-
tracking”, and “personal analytics” [21,22]. 

Personal  informatics  systems  provide  an  advantage  over 
simply  trying  to  remember  information  about  the  self, 
because pure self-reflection is often flawed. This is because 
people have limited memory, cannot directly observe some 
behaviors (e.g., sleep apnea), and may not have the time to 
constantly  and  consistently  observe  some  behaviors  (e.g., 
manually counting steps throughout the day). Reflecting by 
using  memory  alone  makes  it  difficult  to  see  patterns  and 
trends.  People  may  also  not  have 
the  expertise  or 
knowledge  to  make  the  correct  conclusions  about  their 
observations.  Personal  informatics  systems  help  people  by 
facilitating  collection  and  storage  of  personal  information, 
and by providing a means of exploring and reflecting on the 
information. 

RELATED WORK 
We  discuss  prior  work  related  to  the  collection  and 
reflection  aspects  of  personal  informatics,  focusing  on  the 
collection  of  personal 
the  use  of 
visualizations 
in  non-work  settings.  We  also  discuss 
research  projects  and  commercial  products  that  combine 
collection and reflection. 

information,  and 

research  areas 

Many 
focus  on  collecting  personal 
information.  Lifelogging  research  explores  the  use  of 
sensors  to  collect  various  types  of  information  about 
people’s  daily  lives.  MyLifeBits  [7]  envisions  a  future 
when  daily  activities  of  people,  such  as  computing,  web-
browsing  activity,  electronic  communication,  and  media 

usage,  are  recorded  and  archived.  SenseCam,  a  wearable 
digital camera, takes photographs throughout the day while 
worn  by  the  user  [10].  The  device  also  contains  other 
sensors,  such  as  light  sensors,  an  infrared  detector,  and  an 
accelerometer.  GPS  and  microphones  can  be  added  to 
collect  additional  information.  Many  issues  of  collecting 
personal  information  throughout  a  lifetime  have  been 
discussed  in  several  CARPE  (Continuous  Archival  and 
Retrieval of Personal Experiences) workshops [8]. 

techniques 

to  motivate  people 

The experience sampling method or ESM is used in studies 
to  collect  personal  information  in  situ  (in  the  actual 
situation)  over  a  long  period  of  time.  Researchers  have 
developed  many 
to 
participate in these time-intensive studies, such as improved 
questions and mobile devices that facilitate data input [20]. 
Context-aware  devices  alleviate  interruptions  by  alerting 
the  participant  at  more  opportune  times  [12].  However, 
reflection  on  the  data  collected  by  ESM  is  for  the 
researchers  conducting  a  study  and  not 
the  study 
participants. Some experience sampling projects have been 
developed  that  allow  reflection  on  collected  information: 
Track  Your  Happiness  (http://trackyourhappiness.org)  and 
Hsieh and colleagues’ system [11]. 

Personal  Information  Management  (PIM)  focuses  on  how 
people manage their information so they can perform their 
tasks  more  efficiently  [13].  PIM  also  explores  how  people 
can retrieve their information, but the focus is less on self-
reflection and more on staying organized. 

On  the  reflection  side,  Casual  Information  Visualization 
[19]  and  Slow  Technology  [9]  help  people  reflect  on 
everyday patterns. Casual Information Visualization aims to 
expand  the  definition  of  information  visualization  beyond 
work-related  and  analytical  tasks  to  include  non-experts. 
Slow Technology is a design agenda aimed at encouraging 
the development of systems that foster users to slow down 
to reflect, rather than speeding up performance. These areas 
of  research  focus  primarily  on  reflection  and  less  on 
collection  of  personal  information.  While  these  systems 
discuss personal reflection, it is not their primary focus. 

The  areas  mentioned  above  have  examined  collection  and 
reflection  separately.  Personal  informatics  distinguishes 
itself by considering the parts of collection and reflection as 
a  whole  process.  Since  the  data  must  be  about  the  person 
and the person must reflect on that data, the user is involved 
in both collection of and reflection on the data. 

There  have  been  a  number  of  research  projects  that  have 
combined collection and reflection on personal information. 
There  are  research  physical  activity  systems,  such  as 
Fish’n’Steps [15], Shakra [16], and UbiFit [3]. Fish’n’Steps 
used  a  pedometer  to  count  steps  and  a  public  display  to 
visualize  step  counts  between  people.  Shakra  and  UbiFit 
used  mobile  phones  to  collect  and  visualize  physical 
activity  information.  Research  systems  in  sustainability 
have  also  used  technology  for  collection  and  reflection. 
StepGreen  is  a  web  site  where  people  can  report  their 

CHI 2010: Performance, Stagecraft, and MagicApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA558 
sustainable  actions  and  see  visualizations  of  their  progress 
[18].  UbiGreen  is  a  mobile  phone  system  that  tracks  and 
visualizes  green  transportation  habits  [4].  Mycrocosm  is  a 
visual  micro-blogging  site  that  allows  users  to  collect  and 
reflect  on  various  types  of  personal  information  [2].  Many 
commercial  personal  informatics  systems  have  leveraged 
the  ubiquity  of  access  to  information  afforded  by  the 
Internet  and  mobile  devices  to  help  people  in  various 
domains  such  as  finance,  health,  physical  activity,  and 
productivity  (e.g.,  Mint:  http://mint.com,  CureTogether: 
http://curetogether.com,  DailyBurn:  http://dailyburn.com, 
and Slife: http://slifelabs.com, respectively). There are also 
systems  that  allow  collection  of  various  types  of  personal 
information 
and 
(e.g.,  Daytum: 
your.flowingdata: http://your.flowingdata.com). 

http://daytum.com 

More  systems  are  being  created  today,  but  there  is  no 
comprehensive  list  of  problems  that  users  encounter  when 
they  collect  and  reflect  on  personal  information.  There  is 
also no common vocabulary to compare and contrast these 
systems. This paper identifies problems in existing systems 
and  defines  a  model  of  personal  informatics  to  help 
designers and developers create more effective systems.  

METHOD 
To better understand personal informatics systems and their 
users,  we  conducted  a  survey  of  people  who  collect  and 
reflect on their personal information.  

Survey 
The  survey  asked  participants  to  list  the  types  of  personal 
information  they  collect  and  reflect  on.  From  their  list, 
participants  selected  one  that  was  the  most  interesting  and 
relevant  to  them.  The  rest  of  the  survey  focused  on  the 
participant’s  selection  and  had  three  sections.  In  the  first 
two  sections,  participants  answered  questions  about 
collection  and  reflection:  what  tools  they  used,  when  and 
how  often, 
they 
encountered,  and  suggestions  for  improvement.  In  the  last 
section,  the  survey  asked  what  patterns,  trends,  and 
surprises  participants  found  from  reflecting  on 
their 
survey  ended  with  demographics 
information.  The 
range,  marital 
questions 
status, 
(e.g.,  gender,  age 
technology  use).  The 
employment,  education,  and 
following are example questions from the survey1: 

their  motivation  for  use,  problems 

•  How difficult is it to collect this personal information? 
•  What  was  your  initial  motivation  to  reflect  on  this 

collected personal information? 

•  What  patterns  (repeating  events)  have  you  found  when 

exploring this collected personal information? 

Participants 
We recruited participants from a blog dedicated to personal 
informatics (http://quantifiedself.com), a blog about general 
(http://flowingdata.com),  and 
information  visualization 

at 

two 

personal 

informatics  web 

forums 
sites 
(http://slifelabs.com  and  http://moodjam.org).  We  chose 
these  web  sites  because  their  readers  and  users  were  more 
likely  to  have  used  one  or  more  personal  informatics 
systems. Survey participants were entered into a raffle for a 
$25  Amazon  gift  certificate.  We  interviewed  a  subset  of 
to  collect 
these  participants  using 
instant  messenger 
additional  details  about 
their  responses.  Interviewees 
received an additional $10 Amazon gift certificate.    

We  had  68  people  complete  the  surveys,  and  11  agreed  to 
participate in the follow-up interviews. 37 participants were 
male. Ages ranged from 18 to 64 with a median age range 
of  26  to  30.  About  half  had  graduate  degrees  and  another 
half  were  in  college.  More  than  half  worked  full-time. 
savvy.  90%  of 
technologically 
Participants  were 
participants  used  email  or  instant  messenger  daily  to 
communicate.  60%  of  them  used  social  networking  sites 
daily. Most read news websites and blogs, ordered products 
online, and managed bills and bank accounts online. 

RESULTS 
We  created  affinity  diagrams  to  analyze  the  survey  and 
interviews.  We  did  not  determine  a  coding  scheme 
beforehand;  instead  we  identified  themes  from  the  data  as 
we  processed  the  responses.  During  the  analysis,  we 
identified  the  types  of  personal  information  collected  and 
reflected  on  by  participants,  motivations  for  collection  and 
reflection,  and  problems  experienced.  Next,  we  analyzed 
the  survey  and  interviews  for  experiences  with  tools  and 
barriers  that  users  encountered,  identifying  a  model  of 
personal informatics. 

Collected Personal Information 
Participants reported a wide variety of information that they 
collected and reflected on (see Table 1). Many participants 
reflected  on  automatically  collected  information  such  as 
bank  statements  and  email  history,  since  they  are  readily 
available.  Automatically  collected  information  was  split 

automatic  # 

bank statements  54 
email history  52 
credit card bills  38 
phone call history  26 
SMS history  25 
IM history  25 
financial software  23 
electricity bill  23 
browsing history  23 
search history  20 

manual  # 

calendar events  27 
status updates  22 
work activities  22 
blog posts  21 
weight  21 
exercise  20 
browser bookmarks  20 
time at work  18 
social bookmarks  18 
mood  17 

Other automatically collected: heating bill (12), travel (2) 
Other manually collected: journal/diary (16), pictures taken (14), 
sleeping habits (12), food consumption (12), productivity (10), health (9), 
medication intake (7), caloric intake (5), symptoms (5), miles ran (4), 
sports activities (4), blood pressure (4),  blood sugar level (2), dream 
journal (2), step counts (2), relationship status (2), books read (1), habits 
of newborn baby (1), transportation (1)  

1  Visit  http://personalinformatics.org/lab/survey/ 
complete transcript of the survey. 

for  a 

Table 1. Top 10 types of personal information, 
automatically and manually collected by the participants. 

CHI 2010: Performance, Stagecraft, and MagicApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA559 
                                                             
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
between those recorded by industry infrastructures, such as 
financial  transactions  from  banks  and  energy  consumption 
from  utility  companies,  and  those  recorded  by  computing 
applications and services, such as search history and email 
history.  Since  manually  collecting  information  requires 
more  time,  fewer  participants  reflected  on  them.  However, 
there is a greater variety of manually collected information 
because  many  types  of  information  cannot  be  recorded 
automatically. The most popular was calendar events, since 
it is critical for time management. Status updates were also 
popular because of the rise of micro-blogging services (e.g., 
Twitter) that facilitate input using various media.  

for 

the 

tracking 

infrastructure 

The remainder of the discussion will focus on the personal 
information  that  participants  selected  as  the  most  relevant 
and interesting to them. The four categories of information 
most  relevant  and  interesting  to  participants  were  finance, 
journaling,  exercise,  and  general  health.  Finance  is  the 
prevalent information type since there is a strong incentive 
to  keep  track  of  where  one’s  money  goes,  and  there  is  a 
information. 
reliable 
Journaling  is  a  common  activity  for  recording  one’s 
thoughts  and  experiences,  and  people  are  using  new  tools 
such  as  blogs  and  microblogs  (e.g.,  Twitter,  Facebook 
status  updates).  Exercise  is  also  popular  because  it  is  an 
activity  for  which  people  want  to  track  their  progress,  and 
many  devices  and  web  sites  exist  for  collecting  such 
information.  General  health  information,  such  as  food 
consumption,  weight,  symptoms,  medication,  amount  of 
sleep, and alcohol/caffeine intake is also of strong interest. 
As  for  the  outliers,  there  are  people  who  collected 
information  on  productivity,  status  of 
relationships, 
computer  usage,  transportation,  the  habits  of  a  newborn 
baby, and books read. 

Tools Used 
People used a variety of tools to collect information. Some 
used pen and paper because of their flexibility and ease of 
use;  people  can  take  them  anywhere  and  they  are  easily 
accessible  when  a  note  needs  to  be  written.  This  group 
faced  a  problem  in  having  to  transcribe  their  data  to  an 
electronic format in order to visualize their data. Some used 
Excel  spreadsheets  for  graphing.  Many  used  existing 
personal informatics web sites for collecting and reflecting 
on various information, such as finance, food consumption, 
mood,  and  physical  activity.  Some  used  physical  devices 
such  as  pedometers,  the  WiiFit,  and  a  continuous  positive 
airway  pressure  (CPAP)  machine  for  tracking  sleep  apnea. 
Some  activities  had  an  infrastructure  that  automatically 
records  information  such  as  financial  transactions,  search 
history,  and  communication  tools  (e.g.,  email,  instant 
messenger,  and  IRC),  which  people  later  explored  for 
personal 
programming 
backgrounds devised their own way of exploring data (e.g., 
statistical  packages 
for  analysis,  and  programming 
languages to organize and cull information). 

Some  with 

information. 

Reasons 
Participants  gave  several  reasons  for  collecting  and 
information:  natural  curiosity, 
reflecting  on  personal 
interest  in  data,  discovery  of  new  tools,  suggestion  from 
another person, and trigger events. 

Some  people  cited  curiosity  about  themselves  prompted 
them  to  collect  personal  information.  P22  said,  “Curiosity: 
Q: how much would I walk if I didn’t ride my bike? A: kind 
of  a  lot,  but  not  as  much  as  you’d  think.”  Some  people 
identified  themselves  by  their  interest  in  quantitative  data. 
Some participants used the terms “data nerd”, “a student of 
information  visualization”,  and  “geekiness”  to  describe 
themselves.  There  is  also  the  added  value  that  the  data  is 
about  them.  P40  said,  “I’m  an  engineer,  so  numbers  and 
trends and stuff just interest me in general. Plus this data is 
about ME (her emphasis).” 

Finding  personal  informatics  tools  also  encouraged  people 
to  start  collecting  information.  P48  said,  “I’ve  been 
following  Nick  Felton’s  annual  reports  so  when  he  started 
Daytum,  I  joined  to  start  tracking  which  restaurants  I  ate 
at.”  Others  cited  trigger  events,  such  as  problems  in 
relationships  (P60,  P1),  sleep  patterns  (P44),  and  weight 
(P21, P23, P37). Sometimes, the trigger event is combined 
with  an  extra  push  from  another  person.  P49  started 
collecting blood sugar level and blood pressure information 
because of “a doctor’s recommendation (new medical issue, 
new medications).”  

STAGES AND BARRIERS 
We  will  now  introduce  the  stage-based  model  of  personal 
informatics that we derived from analysis of the survey and 
interview  data.  The  model  is  composed  of  a  series  of  five 
stages  (Figure  1):  Preparation,  Collection,  Integration, 
Reflection, and Action. We define each stage and, for each 
one, describe the barriers that participants experienced. 

Preparation Stage 
The Preparation stage occurs before people start collecting 
personal  information.  This  stage  concerns  itself  with 
people’s  motivation  to  collect  personal  information,  how 
they determine what information they will record, and how 
they will record it. 

Barriers in the Preparation stage are related to determining 
what information to collect and what collection tool to use. 
As  noted,  some  people  stumble  upon  tools,  which  drive 
them  to  start  collecting.  However,  this  becomes  a  problem 
when the tool does not satisfy their information needs. This 
causes  them  to  switch  to  another  tool,  which  has  two 
negative consequences: 1) they abandon their previous data 
because most systems do not support data exporting, and 2) 
if they can export data, the formats between the applications 
may  not  be  the  same.  For  example,  P48  used  Google 
spreadsheets to record food and drink consumption then she 
switched 
to  Daytum  where  she  recorded  restaurant 
discovered 
information 
your.flowingdata,  she  returned  to  recording  actual  food 
items.  Better  preparation  in  tool  selection  would  have 

instead.  When 

she 

CHI 2010: Performance, Stagecraft, and MagicApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA560 
Figure 1. The Stage-Based Model of Personal Informatics Systems and its four properties: 1) barriers in a stage cascade to later 
stages; 2) stages are iterative; 3) stages are user- and/or system-driven, and 4) uni- or multi-faceted. The visuals for 3) and 4) can 
be used to show these properties for a particular system. 

helped her avoid a gap in her data. Another example is P23 
who  used  spreadsheets  to  record  jogging  and  biking  times 
before  switching  to  DailyBurn,  She  did  not  transfer  data 
from  the  spreadsheets  to  DailyBurn,  because  she  would 
have  had  to  manually  transfer  the  data,  which  takes  time. 
This  is  a  lost  opportunity  for  more  longitudinal  reflection 
about her physical activity.  

Collection Stage 
The  Collection  stage  is  the  time  when  people  collect 
information  about  themselves.  During  this  stage,  people 
observe  different  personal  information,  such  as  their  inner 
thoughts, their behavior, their interactions with people, and 
their immediate environment. Participants reported different 
frequencies  of  collection:  several  times  a  day  (e.g.,  food 
consumption),  once  a  day  (e.g.,  amount  of  sleep),  several 
times a week (e.g., exercise), or a few times a month (e.g., 
symptoms, books read). 

People  encountered  several  barriers  in  the  collection  stage 
(Table  2).  Many  of  the  problems  are  because  of  the  tool 
used  for  collecting  information.  Some  problems  occurred 
because of the user, either because they lacked time, lacked 
motivation,  or  did  not  remember  to  collect  information. 
Other  problems  are  data-related:  1)  data  may  rely  on 
subjective  estimation  (e.g.,  how  many  calories  were 
expended  when  lifting  weights?  P23);  2)  data  may  rely  on 
subjective  ratings  with  no  standard  for  entering  data  (e.g., 
P1  wanted  to  rate  his  relationship  satisfaction,  but  noticed 

Collection Barriers  Example Quote 

Tool (13/68) 

Remembering 
(12/68) 
Lack of time (11/68) 

Finding data (7/68) 

Accuracy (6/68) 

Motivation (5/68) 

“not having ready access to a computer at the time 
symptoms happen” P6 
“Forgetting to record it. Because I am often not at my 
personal computer.” P57 
“not difficult, time consuming at times.” P16 

“Sometimes life isnʼt interesting enough to make me 
want to write it down, other times I canʼt find any 
worthy writing material.” P54 
“Guestimating mass of food matching homemade or 
restaurant foods against database entries” P5 

“keeping up the motivation to do so, finding payback 
for the investment of time and effort.” P4 

that his ratings were not consistent); 3) data may be hard to 
find  (e.g.,  P54  said,  “Sometimes  life  isn’t  interesting 
enough  to  make  me  want  to  write  it  down,  other  times  I 
can’t find any worthy writing material.”)  

Integration Stage 
Integration is the stage that lies between the Collection and 
Reflection  stages,  where  the  information  collected  are 
prepared, combined, and transformed for the user to reflect 
on.  In  Figure  1,  the  Integration  stage  is  represented  as  the 
distance between the Collection and Reflection stages. This 
distance  is  determined  by  how  much  effort  the  user  has  to 
put into preparing the collected data for the reflection stage. 
The Integration stage can be long, meaning that the user has 
to  do  many  things  to  prepare  the  collected  data  for  the 
reflection  stage.  An  example  of  this  is  when  the  data  to 
visualize  is  collected  on  paper.  In  such  a  system,  the  user 
has  to  gather  all of his notes and transcribe the data into a 
graphing  application  such  as  Excel.  The  Integration  stage 
can  also  be  short,  meaning  that  the  user  bears  little 
responsibility in preparing the collected data for reflection. 
An example of this is Mint, which automatically integrates 
financial  data  from  bank  accounts  and  credit  card 
companies. Another example is Nike+, which automatically 
synchronizes runs between an iPod and the Nike+ website.  

Integration  barriers  prevent  users  from  transitioning  from 
collection to reflection of data (Table 3). Users encountered 
these  problems  when  collected  data  comes  from  multiple 
inputs,  reflection  of  data  happens  in  multiple  outputs,  and 
the  format  of  collected  data  is  different  from  the  format 
necessary for reflection. 

Integration Barriers  Example Quote 

Transcribing data 
(10/68) 

Organization (8/68) 

Scattered 
visualizations (4/68) 
Multiple inputs (3/68) 

“Itʼd be neat if I could graph it straight from the 
website instead of manually typing in the data to a 
spreadsheet” P41 
“Collecting is simple. Organizing it takes some 
time.” P29 
“A bit cumbersome going to so many different sites 
[for visualizations]” P6 
“Difficult to keep organized because sometimes 
data are kept in separate places” P31 

Table 2. Collection barriers. 

Table 3. Integration barriers.  

CHI 2010: Performance, Stagecraft, and MagicApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA561 
 
Reflection Stage 
The  Reflection  stage  is  when  the  user  reflects  on  their 
personal  information.  This  stage  may  involve  looking  at 
lists  of  collected  personal  information  or  exploring  or 
interacting  with  information  visualizations.  Users  may 
reflect on their information immediately after recording the 
information  (short-term)  or  after  several  days  or  weeks 
involving  extensive  self-reflection  (long-term).  Short-term 
reflection  is  valuable  because  it  makes  the  user  aware  of 
their  current  status.  For  example,  pedometers  show  a 
current  aggregate  count  of  steps. 
the 
BodyMedia  SenseWear  armband  (http://bodymedia.com) 
does  not  have  a  display,  so  the  user  is  not  aware  of  the 
amount  of  calories 
they 
synchronize  with 
software.  Long-term 
reflection  is  valuable  because  it  allows  users  to  compare 
personal information between different times and it reveals 
trends and patterns. 

they  have  expended  until 

the  desktop 

In  contrast, 

uses  donations  to  selected  charities  to  encourage  users  to 
achieve their productivity goals. 

Some  people  reflect  on  the  information  to  inform  them  on 
what  actions  to  take.  Most  systems  do  not  have  specific 
suggestions  on  what  to  do  next,  which  is  a  barrier  to 
applying  understanding  of  personal  information.  Different 
systems have resolved this in multiple ways. Some systems 
are more explicit such as Mint providing suggestions about 
bank  and  credit  card  accounts  with  lower  fees.  Some 
systems  involve  input  from  others.  For  example,  some 
people  collect  data  and  share  them  with  their  doctor  for 
advice  on  next  steps  (P1,  P40,  P49).  Some  systems  with 
sharing  capabilities  allow  feedback  from  one’s  social 
(http://sparkpeople.com), 
network, 
about 
DailyBurn 
DailyBurn, “they have forums, which is good to get advice 
from others.” 

(http://dailyburn.com). 

e.g.,  SparkPeople 

said 

P23 

in 

Barriers 
the  Reflection  stage  prevent  users  from 
exploring and understanding information about themselves. 
These  problems  occurred  because  of  lack  of  time  or 
difficulties 
retrieving,  exploring,  and  understanding 
information (Table 4). 

The  stage-based  model  extends  our  view  of  personal 
informatics  systems  beyond  a  pairing  of  collection  and 
reflection tools. We have just defined the specific stages of 
personal  informatics  systems.  We  will  now  describe  the 
properties of the model as a whole. 

Reflection Barriers  Example Quote 

Lack of time (10/68) 

Visualization (6/68) 

Self-criticism (5/68) 

Interpretation (5/68) 

Search (4/68) 

No context (3/68) 

Sparse data (3/68) 

Data is not useful 
(3/68) 

“Having time to go through everything, but that is 
also one of my biggest pleasures is finding that 
time.” P19 
“Itʼs hard to get a holistic view of the data since the 
time filters are at most one month and Iʼd like to look 
at several months at once.” P48 
“Itʼs extremely difficult (psychologically) to look back 
on my earliest journals. Much of that information is 
very emotional and innocent.” P12 

“Sometimes its very difficult to interpret the media” 
P54 
“not too tough. sometimes have to wait while search 
occurs... but itʼs a couple minutes at most” P14 
“Not having an overlay of changes in circumstance” 
P11 
“Not enough; My collection of data has been 
intermittent enough that I donʼt get good time series.” 
P44 
“itʼs really not very useful and itʼs kind of annoying. I 
mean, I walk a lot. What else do I really want to 
know?” P22 

Table 4. Reflection barriers. 

Action Stage 
The Action stage is the stage when people choose what they 
are  going  to  do  with  their  newfound  understanding  of 
themselves. Some people reflect on the information to track 
their  progress  towards  goals.  From  the  understanding  of 
their  information,  people  may  tailor  their  behaviors  to 
match  their  goals.  Some  systems  alert  the  user  to  take 
actions.  For  example,  Mint  alerts  users  when  their  bank 
account  reaches  a  minimum  amount.  The  WiiFit  shows  an 
avatar  that  acts  like  a  personal  trainer;  P37  said,  “The 
WiiFit  avatar  gets  excited  (or  crestfallen)  at  my  progress, 
which is kind of cool, since s/he acts as a personal trainer.” 
Some  systems  provide  incentives  to  motivate  users  to  take 
action.  For example, Slife introduced Slife Rewards, which 

PROPERTIES OF THE STAGES 
Here we talk about the holistic properties of the stages and 
their  implications  on  the  development  and  design  of 
personal 
informatics  systems.  We  will  discuss  four 
properties  of  the  stages:  cascading  barriers,  iteration,  user-
driven  vs.  system-driven,  and  uni-faceted  vs.  multi-faceted 
information.  We  describe 
these 
properties on the design of personal informatics systems. 

implications  of 

the 

if  not 

Barriers Cascade 
An important property of personal informatics systems that 
the  stage-based  model  reveals  is  that  barriers  cascade,  i.e., 
problems  in  earlier  stages  affect  the  later  stages.  Problems 
in the Preparation stage, such as not using the right tool or 
not  collecting  the  right  data,  lead  users  to  change  tools, 
which wastes their time. Since users cannot go back in time 
and  collect  the  right  kind  of  information,  their  collected 
data  are  rendered  somewhat, 
totally,  useless. 
Problems in the Collection stage may lead to sparse datasets 
that  are  insufficient  for  reflection.  P44  lacked  time  and 
motivation  during  the  Collection  stage  because  he  did  not 
have  enough  data  to  get  a  good  time-series  visualization. 
When thinking about what he learned from his data, he said 
“I  wish  I  could  report  successes  on  this  front,  but  my  lack 
of  regular  collection  has  made  this  difficult.”  Problems  in 
the  Integration  stage,  such  as  scattered  visualizations  and 
difficult organization, make reflection harder. P6 noted that 
“each website has their own way of organizing [data]” and 
that  it  was  “a  bit  cumbersome  going  to  so  many  different 
sites.”  Problems  in  the  Reflection  stage,  such  as  having 
trouble  using  visualizations  effectively,  prevent  users  from 
transitioning  to  the  Action  stage.  P64  said,  “I  waste  too 
much  time  exploring  the  variations  of  presentation  rather 
than considering personal changes that might be necessary.”  

CHI 2010: Performance, Stagecraft, and MagicApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA562 
Cascading  barriers  suggest  that  a  holistic  approach  to  the 
design of personal informatics systems is critical. Focusing 
only on one stage ignores the whole experience of the user 
with  the  system.  While  we  can  take  inspiration  from 
different  fields  to  resolve  barriers  within  each  stage  (e.g., 
visualization  techniques  from  information  visualization 
research), creating an effective personal informatics system 
requires the consideration of all of the system's parts.  

Stages are Iterative 
Another property of personal informatics systems is that the 
stages  are  iterative,  i.e.,  users  incorporate  new  data,  tools, 
and/or  processes  as  they  progress  through  the  stages.  We 
asked  our  interviewees  whether  they  knew  what  personal 
information  to  collect  when  they  first  decided  to  collect 
information. Many said they knew, but some changed their 
minds  when  they  found  a  different  collection  method.  For 
example,  P37  switched  between  multitudes  of 
tools 
(whiteboard,  spreadsheet,  WiiFit) 
to  collect  physical 
activity  information.    As  mentioned  before,  P48  changed 
tools as she found new ones (Google spreadsheets, Daytum, 
your.flowingdata).  The  iterative  process  was  not  supported 
well  in  either  case.  For  example,  P48  did  not  transfer  her 
spreadsheet data because Daytum did not support importing 
data (at the time she used the system). When she switched 
to your.flowingdata, she could not import her Daytum data. 

Some  participants  changed  what  personal  information  they 
needed  while  going  through  the  stages,  which  resulted  in 
tool  changes.  P23  changed  collection  tools  because  of 
changes in the types of physical activity she performed: 1) 
spreadsheet for biking and running several years ago; 2) she 
got  a  WiiFit  last  Christmas  for  physical  activity  games;  3) 
she uses DailyBurn now for her gym attendance. P44, who 
programmed  his  own  visualizations  to  learn  about  his 
sleeping  habits,  continually  added  new  information  (e.g., 
caffeine  consumption,  meal  times,  weight)  into  the  reports 
depending  on  his  hypotheses  (e.g.,  what  is  the  effect  of 
caffeine consumption on my sleep patterns?). 

The  iterative  property  of  personal  informatics  systems 
suggests  that  systems  should  be  flexible  to  support  users' 
changing  information  needs.  Systems  could  be  flexible  by 
1) supporting importing data from other systems, as well as, 
exporting  to  other  systems;  and  2)  supporting  different 
kinds  of  information.  Since  tool  changes  may  render 
previously  collected  data  useless,  systems  should  support 
rapid  iteration,  so  that  users  can  quickly  hone  in  on  the 
questions  they  want  to  answer  and  select  the  appropriate 
tools to collect the necessary information. 

User-driven vs. System-driven  
Each  stage  can  be  classified  as  user-driven,  system-driven, 
or a combination of both. When a stage is user-driven, the 
user  is  responsible  for  the  activity  in  the  stage.  In  the 
Preparation stage, the user decides what type of information 
to  collect  and  what  tools  to  use.  User-driven  collection  is 
when  users 
information  on  paper  or  enter 
information into a spreadsheet, an application, or a website 
form.  User-driven  integration  is  when  users  have  to 

record 

transcribe collected information, so that they can reflect on 
it.  In  the  Reflection  stage,  the  user  reflects  on  the 
information without the aid of visualizations or other tools 
for  exploring  the  data.  In  the  Action  stage,  the  user  is 
responsible  for  deciding  on  actions  to  take  depending  on 
their conclusions from the data without aid from the system. 

User-driven  stages  demand  time  and  attention  from  the 
user.  This  is  problematic  when  the  demand  becomes  too 
much (e.g., high frequency of collection). There are ways to 
facilitate user-driven stages. For example, systems that use 
user-driven  collection  can  motivate  the  user  to  collect  the 
information.  Hsieh  and  colleagues  [11]  have  explored  this 
in  the  context  of  experience  sampling;  they  encouraged 
participation  in  an  ESM  study  by  showing  reflective 
visualizations.  An  alternative  way  to  dealing  with  the 
burden of user-driven stages is to transfer the responsibility 
completely to the system, i.e., making them system-driven.  

When  a  stage  is  system-driven,  the  system  takes  on  the 
responsibility  of  performing  the  tasks  in  the  stage.  In  the 
Preparation  stage,  the  system  can  suggest  to  users  the 
appropriate  tools  and  information  that  will  help  them 
answer  their  questions  about  themselves.  In  the  Collection 
stage, the system can collect personal information by using 
sensors  (e.g.,  pedometers),  or  keeping  a  record  of 
transactions (e.g., bank statements, search history). System-
driven collection can also involve other people, e.g., a nurse 
writes  the  data  for  the  patient  into  a  web  site.  In  the 
Integration stage, the system can aggregate and prepare the 
information  for  reflection,  e.g.,  Mint  aggregates  data  from 
different banks and credit card companies. In the Reflection 
stage, the system can help users reflect on and explore their 
information  using  visualizations.  In  the  Action  stage, 
systems  can  alert  the  user  to  take  action,  e.g.,  Wakoopa 
(http://wakoopa.com) 
suggests  new  applications  and 
websites depending on the person's computer usage. 

that 

the  stages  suggests 

there  are 
This  property  of 
opportunities within each stage of a system to use a system-
driven  approach  to  alleviate  the  demands  on  the  user. 
However, designers should consider the tradeoffs between a 
system-driven  approach  (e.g.,  inaccuracies  of  automated 
analysis,  and  loss  of  user  control)  and  a  user-driven 
approach  (e.g.,  burden  and  complexity).  Developers  and 
designers can select which stage could be facilitated by the 
system to benefit the user the most. 

Facets 
People’s  lives  are  composed  of  different  facets.  For 
example, people have their home life, their work life, their 
daily interactions with other people, their physical activity, 
etc.  Personal  informatics  systems  can  be  uni-faceted  or 
multi-faceted.  Currently,  most  systems  are  uni-faceted, 
showing  only  one  facet  of  a  person's  life  (e.g.,  Mint  for 
financial matters, Nike+ for physical activity, and Slife for 
productivity). Facets are not necessarily correlated with the 
number of pieces of information collected by a system. For 
example,  the  BodyMedia  SenseWear  armband  is  uni-

CHI 2010: Performance, Stagecraft, and MagicApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA563 
skin 

ambient 

faceted  because  all  the  data  it  collects  (e.g.,  galvanic  skin 
response, 
temperature, 
temperature, 
acceleration)  represent  only  one  facet  of  life,  i.e.,  physical 
activity.  An  example  of  a  multi-faceted  system 
is 
MyLifeBits 
information  about 
computing  activity,  web-browsing  activity,  communication 
(voice,  email,  and  IM),  and  media  usage  (radio  and 
television). Research projects in diabetes management have 
shown  the  value  of  associating  multiple  facets  (e.g.,  blood 
sugar level and food consumption) in patients' health [6,17]. 

[7],  which  collects 

aware 

facets  of 

Uni-faceted systems simplify the collection and integration 
of  personal  information  because  there  is  less  data  to 
manage.  However,  uni-faceted  systems  limit  the  type  of 
information that people can understand about their life. For 
example,  the  WiiFit  shows  people  progress  toward  their 
physical  activity  goals,  but  there  is  no  awareness  of  the 
effect  of  food  consumption,  mood,  sleeping  patterns,  and 
work  on  physical  activity.  Systems  with  multi-faceted 
collection  stages  such  as  MyLifeBits  and  Daytum  allow 
collection  of  multiple  types  of  information,  which  makes 
collection  of  data  harder,  but  offers  greater  potential  for 
becoming 
life. 
about  different 
Unfortunately,  such  systems  usually  present  information 
about  multiple  facets  in  separate  visualizations.  Many 
participants  expressed  their  desire  to  see  associations 
between  multiple  facets  of  their  lives.  P26  described  his 
motivation  to  collect  multiple  types  of  information  as  "to 
and 
understand 
circumstances."  There  is  an  opportunity  here  for  personal 
informatics  systems  to  provide  visualizations  (Reflection 
Stage) that show people the relationships between different 
facets of their lives. However, the benefit of multiple facets 
has  its  cost.  P49,  talking  about  tracking  medication  intake, 
said,  “I  suppose  if  it  were  easily  collected,  information  on 
food  intake,  calories,  fat,  cholesterol,  sodium,  etc.,  would 
make an interesting starting point for analysis. However, if 
it  is  too  difficult  to  collect,  I  have  better  things  to  do  with 
my time.”  

symptoms, 

behaviors, 

trends 

in 

researchers 

information,  and 

This property of personal informatics systems opens several 
opportunities  for  research  and  applications.  Many  existing 
technologies  are  capable  of  collecting  various  types  of 
personal 
in  ubiquitous 
computing  and  lifelogging  are  developing  new  collection 
tools. How can personal informatics systems leverage these 
new technologies to inform people about different facets of 
their  lives?  What  would  visualizations  that  show  multiple 
facets  of  people's  lives  look  like?  How  should  they  be 
designed  so  that  non-experts  (most  people)  can  gain 
insights about their lives? 

Limitations of the Survey and Model 
We recruited participants from a blog dedicated to personal 
informatics, a blog about general information visualization, 
and  two  personal  informatics  web  sites,  so  most  survey 
participants  were  familiar  with  personal  informatics.  Since 
even  these  interested  users  had  plenty  of  problems  with 
different  systems,  we  suspect  that  the  problems  they 

encountered  may  be  a  subset  of  problems  that  common 
users  may  experience.  We  think  it  would  be  interesting  to 
study users with little or no prior experience with personal 
informatics  systems  to  find  specific  barriers  that  they  may 
encounter. 

CASE STUDIES 
Having  identified  the  stages  model,  the  properties  of  the 
stages,  and  the  barriers  experienced  within  the  stages,  we 
can  now  apply  the  model  to  analyze  personal  informatics 
systems.  In  this  section,  we  evaluate  existing  personal 
informatics systems to demonstrate the use of the model. In 
consideration  of  space,  we  only  highlight  some  aspects  of 
each system. We describe barriers that users may encounter 
and suggest potential solutions to explore further. 

Twitter-based systems 
There are several personal informatics tools that use Twitter 
as  a  collection  tool.  Some  collect  specific  types  of 
information  such  as  eating  (http://tweetwhatyoueat.com) 
and  smoking  (http://qwitter.tobaccofreeflorida.com),  while 
some  collect  multiple  types  of  information  (e.g.,  Daytum, 
Grafitter,  Mycrocosm,  and  your.flowingdata).  Users 
manually  enter data  into Twitter, but the  cost  of collection 
is  reduced  because  users  can  collect  information  using 
different  applications  and  devices  (e.g.,  browser,  instant 
messenger,  mobile  phone)  in  different  contexts.  The 
Integration  stage  is  also  simplified  because  all  data  are 
funneled through Twitter. There are two areas that could be 
further explored for improvements: 

Scattered  visualizations.  The  uni-faceted  Twitter-based 
systems  do  not  have  the  data  to  associate  multiple  facets 
together. However, the multi-faceted systems have multiple 
data  collected,  but  do  not  visualize  the  data  together.  P27, 
who  used  your.flowingdata,  suggested  that  "relating  many 
datasets  at  once"  would  improve  the  system.  This  design 
suggestion could be as simple as associating two pieces of 
information  together.  For  example,  a  person  who  collects 
information about expenditure and eating locations may see 
directly how her eating habits are affecting her finances. 

Lack of time to collect data. These systems also suffer from 
the tedium of manually collecting information. P48 said, of 
her  experience  with  your.flowingdata  and  Daytum,  “I  just 
find  it  hard  enough  to  track  food  regularly,  so  I  haven’t 
tracked  other  things  that  I  would  like  to.”  A  design 
suggestion  to  address  this  is  to  automate  some  of  the  data 
collection.  Not  all  collection  can  be  automated,  but  some 
data can be. One inspiration is the concept of tweetjects [1], 
sensors  and  devices  that  post  to  Twitter.  Some  tweetjects 
post personal information, such as @gareth_laptop (nearby 
devices),  @andy_house  (electricity  usage),  and  @kickbee 
(baby activities in the womb).  

Mint (finance) 
Mint  is  a  personal  finance  management  website.  Mint  is 
mostly  system-driven.  Mint  provides  some  support  in  the 
Preparation  stage  by  helping  users  select  the  banks,  credit 
cards  and  investments  that  the  system  will  integrate.    The 

CHI 2010: Performance, Stagecraft, and MagicApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA564 
Collection stage is completely system-driven, supported by 
the bank and credit card infrastructures that record financial 
transactions.  Mint  integrates  your  transaction  records  from 
multiple  bank,  credit  card,  and  investment  accounts.  P9 
noted that one of the flaws of Mint is that it "automatically 
categorizes  [transactions],  which  works  95%  of  the  time, 
but  not  always.  I  need  it  to  be  almost  perfect  to  use  it  for 
more  than  curiosity."  The  system-driven  integration  is  not 
perfect,  so  manual  integration  is  still  needed  to  provide 
category  labels  for  unlabeled  transactions  and  to  fix 
mislabeled 
reflection  with 
It 
visualizations  of  a  user’s  spending  between  different 
categories.  Mint  is  one  of  the  few  personal  informatics 
systems  that  have  system  support  for  the  Action  stage;  it 
provides  suggestions  on  how  a  user  can  save  money  by 
finding  banks  with  discounted  services  and  credit  card 
companies  with  low  rates,  and  alerting  users  of  low 
balances and unusual activity.  

transactions. 

supports 

No  support  for  multi-faceted  reflection.  Reflection  within 
Mint  is  uni-faceted.  P12  noted:  “I  now  want  to  record  all 
the  minutiae  of  my  personal  life  that  aggregates  into 
interesting data. I want to graph the people I see, the things 
I  do,  the  hours  I  devote  to  every  significant  task,  and  the 
money  I  spend  and  why  (our  emphasis).  I  want  to  have 
yearly  data  that  shows,  for  example,  that  I  spent  1,000 
hours  on  programming,  but  only  400  on  reading,  or  that  I 
spent twice as much in coffee shops as I did on groceries.” 
She  does  not  use  Mint,  but  would  have  found  it  useful  for 
comparing  her  expenditures  at  coffee  shops  and  groceries; 
however,  Mint's  visualizations  would  not  help  her  answer 
the  “why”  question.  She  speculated 
there  are 
associations  between  different  facets  of  her  life;  allowing 
input about different life facets in Mint may help her.  Since 
Mint  is  largely  system-driven,  adding  extra  information  to 
associate  with  spending  may  be  a  small  burden  to  users, 
even if manually collected. 

that 

IMPACT (physical activity) 
IMPACT  is  a  mobile  phone  and  web  site  system  for 
collecting  and  reflecting  on  physical  activity,  with  which 
we  had  first-hand  experience  in  deploying  to  users  for 
several  weeks  [14].  We  highlight  two  problems  with 
IMPACT that could be further explored for solutions. 

No support for Preparation stage. The IMPACT system did 
not  have  support  for  the  Preparation  stage.  The  IMPACT 
system collected four types of information: step counts and 
the context in which those steps were taken (location, type 
of  activity,  and  whom  the  person  was  with).  The  system 
imposed  these  types  of  information  without  determining 
whether the user might find all the information useful. We 
learned that users were interested in the effects of mood and 
weather  on  physical  activity,  but  IMPACT  did  not  support 
these  types  of  information.  Problems  in  the  Preparation 
stage  affected  the  Collection  stage  leading  to  barriers  such 
as  too  much  information  to  collect.  Collecting  the  three 
types  of  context  unnecessarily  burdened  the  user,  when 
other types of information may have been more useful (e.g., 

mood,  weather).  There  were  other  collection  barriers  such 
as  intrusiveness  (experience  sampling  type  alerts),  and  the 
use of separate devices for monitoring step counts  (mobile 
phone) and location (GPS device). 

to 

transcribe  step  counts, 

User-driven  Integration.  An  initial  version  of  IMPACT 
required  users 
time,  and 
contextual  information  from  a  notebook  to  a  web  site.  We 
fixed  this  in  the  current  version  with  a  system-driven 
integration,  where  the  system  automatically  transfers  data 
collected  on  a  mobile  phone  to  a  web  site.  We  could  have 
avoided  the  problem  with  the  initial  prototype  if  we  had 
considered the Integration stage earlier. 

Notice  that  the  two  problems  described  above  could  have 
been avoided if we had analyzed IMPACT using the stage-
based  model  of  personal  informatics  systems  earlier  in  its 
development.  Addressing  these  problems  may  improve 
users'  experience  with  the  system  and  yield  results  for  the 
use of context in improving monitoring of physical activity. 

DISCUSSION 
We  have  defined  a  stage-based  model  of  personal 
informatics  systems  and  identified  a  comprehensive  list  of 
the  problems  that  people  experience  in  each  of  the  stages. 
We also described the properties of the stages, which have 
implications in the design of personal informatics systems. 
To build effective personal informatics systems, developers 
and designers should consider the following: 

•  Since  barriers  cascade  to  later  stages,  designers  and 
developers  should  consider  the  system  as  a  whole.  This 
holistic  approach  requires  integrating  innovations  and 
applying lessons from different areas of research, such as 
information 
computing, 
ubiquitous 
lifelogging, 
visualization, and persuasive technologies. 

•  Since users iterate in the kinds of questions they ask and 
the  tools  they  use,  flexibility  within  a  system  and 
between  systems  is  important.  Systems  should  allow 
users  to  easily  change  what  kind  of  data  they  collect 
dependent  on  their  needs  and  to  transfer  data  from  one 
system to another. 

•  There  are  opportunities  within  each  stage  to  use  a 
system-driven  approach  to  reduce  the  demand  on  users 
and  to  make  the  experience  more  enjoyable  and  useful. 
Similarly, a user-driven approach is appealing because it 
leaves control in the hands of the user. Insights from the 
field  of  human-computer  interaction  should  play  a  big 
part  in  the  development  of  mixed-initiative  approaches 
for effective personal informatics systems. 

•  Currently,  most  personal  informatics  systems  are  uni-
faceted.  Participants  expressed  desire  for  associating 
different  aspects  of  their  lives  together.  Creating  multi-
faceted  systems  may  be  difficult  because  of  the  extra 
data  that  need  to  be  collected,  however  the  insights 
gained  may  be  worth  it.  There  are  opportunities  to 
leverage  the  increasing  ability  of  ubiquitous  computing 
and  lifelogging  technologies  to  collect  various  types  of 

CHI 2010: Performance, Stagecraft, and MagicApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA565 
information and show users multiple facets of their lives. 
These  multiple  facets  must  be  displayed  in  ways  that 
users can understand them and gain valuable insight into 
their lives. 

CONCLUSION 
Personal informatics is a growing class of systems that can 
help  people  know  themselves  better.  More  people  are 
building  such  systems  and  there  is  an  opportunity  to 
provide  design 
for  creating  more 
effective systems. 

recommendations 

In  studying  how  people  use  personal  informatics  systems, 
we  gained  an  understanding  of  their  motivations  and 
practices.  We  used  this  to  define  a  model  that  describes 
personal  informatics  systems  as  a  series  of  5  stages.  We 
compiled  a  comprehensive  list  of  barriers  that  people 
encountered in each stage. We also described properties of 
the  stages:  cascading  effect  of  barriers,  iterative,  system-
driven  vs.  user-driven,  and  uni-faceted  vs.  multi-faceted. 
These properties have implications in the design of personal 
informatics 
should  be  designed 
holistically;  2)  they  should  improve  support  for  iteration 
between  stages;  3)  an  appropriate  balance  of  automated 
technology  and  user  control  should  be  applied  within  each 
stage  to  facilitate  the  user  experience;  and  4)  they  should 
explore  support  for  multiple  facets  of  people’s  lives  to 
enrich the value of systems. 

systems:  1) 

they 

framework 
personal 

We believe the model and its properties will be valuable for 
future  research  and  development  because  it  provides  a 
for  describing,  comparing,  and 
common 
evaluating 
systems.  Personal 
informatics 
informatics  systems  pose  new  interesting  HCI  challenges. 
We believe that the stage-based model, the identification of 
the  barriers  within  each  stage,  and  the  description  of  the 
properties  of  the  stages  will  help  HCI  researchers  and 
practitioners  find  solutions  and  explore  new  approaches  in 
personal informatics more efficiently. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  would 
participants and the websites that helped our recruitment. 

thank  our  survey  and 

like 

to 

interview 

REFERENCES 
1.  Alleyne, R. "The house that Twitters." Telegraph.co.uk, 
September 8, 2009. Accessed on September 16, 2009 at 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/science/science-
news/6156291/The-house-that-Twitters.html 

2.  Assogba,  Y.,  and  Donath,  J.  Mycrocosm:  Visual 

Microblogging. HICSS'09, 2009, pp. 1-10. 

3.  Consolvo,  S.,  McDonald,  D.W.,  Toscos,  T.,  et  al. 
Activity  Sensing  in  the  Wild:  A  Field  Trial  of  Ubifit 
Garden. CHI‘08, 2008, pp. 1797-1806. 

4.  Froehlich, J., Dillahunt, T., Klasnja, P., et al. Ubigreen: 
for  Tracking  and 

Investigating  a  Mobile  Tool 

Supporting Green Transportation Habits. CHI’09, 2009, 
pp. 1043-1052. 

5.  Franklin, B. Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin. New 

York, 1916, pp. 146-155. 

6.  Frost, J. and Smith, B.K. Visualizing Health: imagery in 

diabetes education. DUX ’03, 2003, pp. 1-14. 

7.  Gemmell,  J.,  Bell,  G.,  and  Lueder,  R.  MyLifeBits:  a 
personal  database  for  everything.  Communications  of 
the ACM, 2006, pp. 88-95. 

8.  Gemmell,  J.  &  Vemuri,  S.  "CARPE  Research  Area." 
SIGMM.  Accessed 
at 
2010 
on 
http://www.sigmm.org/Members/jgemmell/CARPE 
9.  Hallnäs,  L.  and  Redström,  J.  Slow  Technology: 
Designing  for  Reflection.  Personal  and  Ubiquitous 
Computing, 5(3), 2001. 

January 

6, 

10. Hodges, S., Williams, L., Berry, E., et al., K. SenseCam: 
a  Retrospective  Memory  Aid.  Ubicomp’06,  2006,  pp. 
177-193. 

11. Hsieh, G., Li, I., Dey, A., Forlizzi, J., and Hudson, S.E. 
in 
to 

Using  Visualizations 
Experience Sampling. Ubicomp’08, 2008, pp. 164-167. 
12. Intille,  S.S.,  Tapia,  E.M.,  Rondoni,  J.,  et  al.  Tools  for 
Studying Behavior and Technology in Natural Settings. 
Ubicomp’03, 2003, pp. 157-174. 

Increase  Compliance 

13. Jones,  W.,  and  Teevan,  J.  Personal  Information 

Management. UW Press, 2007. 

14. Li,  I.,  Dey,  A.,  and  Forlizzi,  J.  Using  Contextual 
Information to Improve Awareness of Physical Activity. 
Engaging Data Forum 2009, Boston, MA, 2009. 

15. Lin, J.J., Mamykina, L., Lindtner, S., et al. Fish’n’Steps: 
Encouraging  Physical  Activity  with  an  Interactive 
Computer Game. Ubicomp’06, 2006, pp. 261-278. 

16. Maitland,  J.,  Sherwood,  S.,  Barkhuus,  L.,  et  al. 
Increasing  the  Awareness  of  Moderate  Exercise  with 
Pervasive  Computing. 
IEEE  Pervasive  Health 
Conference, 2006, pp. 1-9. 

17. Mamykina,  L.,  Mynatt,  E.D.,  and  Kaufman,  D.R. 
of 
health  management 
Investigating 
individuals with diabetes. CHI’06, 2006, pp. 927-936. 
18. Mankoff, J., Kravets, R., and Blevis, E. Some Computer 
in  Creating  a  Sustainable  World. 

Science  Issues 
Computer, 41(8), 2008, pp. 102-105. 

practices 

19. Pousman,  Z.,  Stasko,  J.T.,  and  Mateas,  M.  Casual 
Information  Visualization:  Depictions  of  Data 
in 
Everyday Life. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and 
Computer Graphics, 2002, pp. 1145-1152. 

20. Scollon,  C.,  Kim-Prieto,  C.,  and  Diener,  E.  Experience 
Sampling:  Promises  and  Pitfalls,  Strengths  and 
Weaknesses. Journal of Happiness Studies, 4, 2003, pp. 
5-34. 

21. Wolf,  G.  Know  Thyself:  Tracking  Every  Facet  of  Life, 
from  Sleep  to  Mood  to  Pain,  24/7/365.  Wired,  17.07, 
2009, pp. 92-95. 

22. Yau,  N. and Schneider,  J.  Self-Surveillance.  Bulletin of 

ASIS&T, June/July 2009, pp. 24-30. 

CHI 2010: Performance, Stagecraft, and MagicApril 10–15, 2010, Atlanta, GA, USA566 
 
