Fengjiao Peng
MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, MA, USA
fpeng@mit.edu

A Trip to the Moon: Personalized Animated Movies for
Self-reﬂection
Veronica Crista LaBelle
MIT
Cambridge, MA, USA
vlabelle@mit.edu
Rosalind W. Picard
MIT Media Lab
Cambridge, MA, USA
picard@media.mit.edu

Emily Christen Yue
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA, USA
eyue@college.harvard.edu

ABSTRACT
Self-tracking physiological and psychological data poses the
challenge of presentation and interpretation. Insightful nar-
ratives for self-tracking data can motivate the user towards
constructive self-reﬂection. One powerful form of narrative
that engages audience across various culture and age groups
is animated movies. We collected a week of self-reported
mood and behavior data from each user and created in Unity a
personalized animation based on their data. We evaluated the
impact of their video in a randomized control trial with a non-
personalized animated video as control. We found that person-
alized videos tend to be more emotionally engaging, encourag-
ing greater and lengthier writing that indicated self-reﬂection
about moods and behaviors, compared to non-personalized
control videos.

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.1. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Animations.

Author Keywords
Personalization; animation; emotion; engagement; empathy;
self-reﬂection.

INTRODUCTION
The development of mobile phone technology and biological
sensors is enabling individuals to self-track biological, phys-
ical and environmental information. From rich self-tracking
data, individuals can interpret and infer the patterns, correla-
tions and causal relations in their own behavior and wellbeing.
Recent HCI research attempts to help users build up a critical
understanding of their data, especially to motivate users to
change their behaviors for the betterment of their own well-
being or their social, biological environment [26]. We often

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-5620-6/18/04. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173827

need to couple such critical thinking with emotional engage-
ment, as emotions are a powerful factor in both impairing and
facilitating decision making [20].

Storytelling or narratives are a fundamental way in which
human beings make sense of the world [16]. To help users
interpret self-tracking data, we are often trying to retell the
story behind the data. To construct the appropriate narrative
for different reﬂective purposes, HCI designers deploy a wide
range of design languages. The language could be quantitative,
iterating through the data or summarizing them in statistics,
tables, or graphs. Others choose a more qualitative, implicit
approach, embedding meanings in dynamic visuals, audio, and
physical forms, allowing for less precise and more ambiguous
feedback to the user. (See Höök’s AffectCam [25] and Affective
Diary [15]) Sengers points out that ambiguity and multiple
interpretations in HCI systems can often open up new design
spaces that converge with art and humanities [27].

We’ve seen traditional quantitative reﬂective designs made
powerful with an intelligent narrative, such as in Hans
Rosling’s talks on the visualization of statistics [22]. The
statistics are brought to life by a dynamic, emotional narrative,
which induces audience’s curiosity and empathy towards the
story behind the ﬁgures. It takes storytelling skills and a deep
understanding of the background knowledge to create these
engaging narratives, which is difﬁcult to realize for chaotic and
often sparse self-tracking data on an individual basis, where
the causal and correlational relations are hard to capture. Fur-
thermore, an engaging narrative for personal data should be
based on a knowledge of personal context. For example, when
a mobile phone app records reduced exercise rate, it could be
either due to a downturn of mood or a vacation. The narrative
to motivate the user to get back on track in exercise should
take into account these personal contextual differences.

We attempt to create emotional, personal narratives of data
related to behavior and mental wellbeing by making animated
movies customized to each individual’s emotional trajectory.
Readers can compare our story world to the animated movie
Inside Out, where emotions are symbolized as characters and
environment designs. To make it practical for a large num-
ber of users, we created a novel fully automated animation
generator that works by parameterizing animations, within a

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 253Page 1game engine. The parameters are derived from each user’s
personal data stream that they input over a week. We thus
deploy a design language for "seeing their data" that most
users ﬁnd familiar and easy to engage with emotionally: the
ﬁlmic language of animation movies.

HCI and conversational agent designers have successfully
transplanted animation principles to communicate affective
states both from users and to users across different cultural
backgrounds. [11, 2, 30] These principles are often referred
to as "illusions of life", designed to bring lifelike qualities to
animated characters [21]. The core notion is that characters’
actions should reﬂect intelligence, emotion and personality
[29]. In animated movies, these animation principles, as well
as a cohesive storyline, dedicated cinematography, light, and
atmospheric and sound design work together to engage the
viewers in the characters’ twisting and turning emotional tra-
jectory.

Our animated movies are personalized on two levels: explicit
and implicit. On the explicit level, the cinematographic art
and the storyline vary according to the input data of mood and
behavior across time. On the implicit level, we do not try to
enact the user’s past experience precisely through animation.
The scenes aim at creating general mood and atmosphere, indi-
cating instead of elaborating on the often complex and tangled
emotions experienced by the user. The Barnum effect states
the tendency for individuals to accept general and ambiguous
personality tests outcome descriptions as accurate if they are
told that the results are tailored for them. [28] We hypothesize
that by knowing the animated movie is customized to their
data, users will see more than is visualized in the movie and
relate implicit animations and ﬁlmic effects to explicit past
experiences. In our experiment, 17 out of 23 participants were
able to connect the movie with their past experience when
asked, "what do you think the video reﬂected about you".

While physiological, behavioral and self-report data can be
used to track user’s psychological processes [19], in this work,
we use self-reported mood and behavior data for three reasons:
First, we can avoid challenges in the interpretation of physiol-
ogy data, such as the difﬁculty in distinguishing between joy
and anger [3]; Second, users can recall and implicitly select
the affective states they wish to have feedback on, which pro-
motes mindfulness and awareness of their emotions [1]; Third,
users are required to recall the past 24 hours every day, so their
memory of the events should be relatively reliable [12].

The goal of this project is to open up the design space where
users’ mood and behavior data are relived in an emotional
narrative, in order to maximize viewer’s self-compassion and
motivation to maintain or change their behavior post viewing.
We demonstrate in a one-week randomized control study that
while both animation don’t involve a traditional "story" narra-
tive, users are better at interpreting personalized animations
compared to a generic animation; that users are able to connect
to the animated agent, engage with the animated movies emo-
tionally and constructively reﬂect on their mood and behavior
patterns.

Figure 1. A common story structure for animated feature ﬁlms. The
rat, robot and clown ﬁsh characters are from Ratatouille (Pixar, 2007),
Wall-E (Pixar, 2008) and Finding Nemo (Pixar, 2003).

RELATED WORK
This section summarizes previous research on designing HCI
systems to reﬂect affective states and building motivational
narratives for self-reﬂection and behavior change.

Reﬂective Design
Reﬂective design focuses on embedding unconscious cultural
assumptions and values in the design of IT systems, in particu-
lar to promote a user’s critical understanding of such values
[26]. Höök proposed the concept of the affective loop expe-
rience where the users are pulled into either virtual or bodily
feedback loops to their own emotions [10].

Implicit reﬂective systems can involve both quantitative and
qualitative design languages. EmotionCheck is an emotion-
regulation technology featuring a wearable device designed to
provide a false, lower heart rate to the users to regulate their
anxiety level [5]. The regulation is done without users being
implicitly involved in trying to reduce their heart rate. Other
approaches use visual or physical forms to embody the signals.
AffectCam [25] uses physiological measures of arousal to se-
lect the most memorable photos in an individual’s ordinary
life. Affective Diary [15] incorporates the bodily experience
of movement and arousal in an individual’s journaling process.
These designs support and sustain the reﬂection and reliving
of past experiences. Users are able to discover correlations be-
tween behaviors and the affective reﬂections which may give
new insight and inspire life changes [15]. Our work is similar
in its efforts to review past experiences, but does so while
superimposing an emotional response through the animation
effects.

Motivational Narrative Systems
Health, education and training can be incorporated in gaming
narratives where users are motivated by in-game rewards [18].
The study of Roth et al [23] explored the factors that give

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 253Page 2Figure 2. System overview. Six types of data (overall mood, sleep and exercise, social interaction, sense of purpose, stress, and one line as memory
retrieval cue) dictate the story.

interactive storytelling in video games motivational appeal
for the user: curiosity, suspense, aesthetic pleasure and self-
enhancement. In the game for health designed by Gobel et
al [7], user’s body movement, heart rate, pulse and person-
alized workout data are used to inﬂuence the storytelling of
the video game. Gustafsson et al [8] designed a mobile-phone
based game linked to the power consumption of the house,
where teenagers are motivated to keep the virtual monster
avatar healthy through lowering the power consumption. Un-
like traditional motivational games, our approach focuses on
building emotional connection with the agent by a determined,
non-interactive story. We focus on the passive consumption
of the narrative and the loss of control, which fundamentally
distinguish movies and TV from gaming, and their different
cognitive and psychological effects on the user.

SYSTEM OVERVIEW
Several empirical principles in animated ﬁlm making provide
an intuition for creating this work. In Disney and Pixar ani-
mated movies, the agent (main character) often has a simple
goal and a limited skill set to achieve the goal. The exposition,
rising action, climax and falling action in traditional story-
telling [6] all spring from obstacles that prevents the agent
from achieving the goal. (Fig. 1) The goal is common and
broad enough to conform to a majority of viewer and life situa-
tions. The symbolic form of goal also signiﬁes the ﬂow of time
and metamorphosis in the agent. While the obstacles bring
depth to the story, the agent can have a simple personality,
allowing both children and adults to relate.

Based on the story structure, we create a narrative where a
corgi dog (agent) travels and attempts to go to the moon (goal)
where he/she either succeeds or fails. We depict the dog’s
journey by means of it following an ever-changing path, based
on the personal data, representative of traveling through life.
Along this journey, the dog will face various obstacles, in the

form of weather, rocks blocking his way to the moon, and
more, of which the nuances and variations will be dictated
by the user’s self-reported mood and behavior data, recorded
every day over a week. The dog will also encounter social
interactions (with other dog agents) that can elicit a variety of
feelings.

Six main groups of mood and behavior data are collected from
the user through daily surveys: overall mood today, sleep and
exercise, stress, social interaction, sense of purpose, and a line
that reminds the user of that day. The questions on overall
mood, sleep and exercise, stress and social interaction are
adapted from Sano’s study to measure stress, sleep and happi-
ness, where one’s mental wellbeing is systematically evaluated
[24]. Sleep cycles, exercise and social interaction are corre-
lated with mood [24]. The questions on sense of purpose are
adapted from the purpose-in-life test, as the sense of purpose
is highly correlated with depression and other mental health
problems [9]. After a preliminary study, we found that it’s
often difﬁcult for users to recall the events on a day as far as a
week ago by just telling them "last Tuesday". Therefore we ask
the users for one line as memory retrieval cue, which is visual-
ized as chapter titles in the animation. In the experiment, we
received cues on a spectrum, varying from concrete ones, such
as "Back to work after Labor Day...", "Rainy beautiful sunset
KKC", "Pho Basil", to more abstract ones such as "Idiotic",
"defused bombs", "tell me why, yang", "You are beautiful".

From Data to Animation
We built a 3D environment in Unity and used a polygon dog
model as the agent. We chose dogs as our avatars because
they have intuitive expressions of emotions, with which we
can avoid the "uncanny valley" problems of humanoid avatars.
The agent’s animation is created by experienced animators
to display distinct emotions through his/her facial expression
and body movement, each story event being the combination

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 253Page 3Figure 3. Three color and weather schemes that correspond to depres-
sion, anger and excitement.

of several animations. When the animation starts, the agent
navigates to the goal, stopping whenever an event happens.
Fig. 2 shows the mapping between data and animation events.

The choices of animation are made by three researchers based
on their prior experience in ﬁlming or animation, and computa-
tional constraints. For example, stress is represented by rocks
falling from the sky. In early iterations, we experimented with
a mountain appearing, forming visual obstacle in front of the
agent. However, re-computing the agent’s navigation path
while the landscape was changing raised computational issues,
causing the agent to sometimes walk underground. Future
work, incorporating varied environments, can add additional
visualizations of stressors.

One line that will remind you of today. This line is used as
chapter titles in the animation, and each day is a chapter. Due
to the sparsity of data (users occasionally fail to ﬁll out daily
surveys) and repetitiveness of "normal" days, the four most
"dramatic" days of the week, i.e. the data peak and valleys,
are used in the animation.

Overall Mood. We map each users’ overall feeling to a va-
lence and arousal chart, using Likert scales of 1-7 that users
would select in the surveys. Different points on the valence-
arousal graph are mapped to different states of the agent’s
body animation and facial expression and moving speed; the
steepness of the agent’s surroundings, the color and weather
embedded in the environment; the forest sound and music
effects. For example, when the mood is calm and peaceful,
the agent wanders leisurely with a content smile, the ground is
smooth, the color scheme is a light purple with a thin layer of
smoke, and the forest sounds of bird chirping and breezes. All
the factors are designed to express the emotion experienced in
the day. (Fig. 3)

Daily events. Users report social interactions, bed time, sleep
length and quality, and amount of exercise every day. The
social interaction between the agent and other dog agents
depends on how much social interaction there is, what kind
of interaction it is and who the user interacted with. General
types of interaction include: no interaction, where the corgi
acts with loneliness or content solitude, neutral interactions
that don’t affect mood, a happy, playful interaction, an angry
ﬁght, rejection. Depending on who the user interacts with,
we introduce a power dynamic through the size of other dog
agents that our corgi agent interacts with, where smaller would
imply interacting with someone more submissive, inferior or
childlike, and larger would imply interacting with someone
more dominant or authoritative.

Similar to the social interactions, sleep and exercise events
are scripted to depict users’ data in that category. Too little
sleep would affect performance in the agent’s movement, and
eventually cause him or her to fall asleep. A good amount of
exercise will make the agent appear more energetic and better
overcome the steep landscape.

Stress. Stress is another factor that is closely related to mood,
and often requires user’s active regulation. Facing the same
stressor, some view it as a challenge, a source of motivation,
while others view it as a threat [17]. Therefore, we designed
separate questions "how stressful is today" and "how was your
experience handling the stress." The ﬁrst question investigates
users’ perceived level of stress, and the second question in-
vestigates how resilient or vulnerable they are when facing
the stress. To answer "how was your experience handling the
stress," users can select on a Likert scale of 0-7, where 0 corre-
sponds to "I was anxious and stressed out", and 7 corresponds
to "I felt things were under control". Stressors are visualized in
the movie as a rain of rocks that blocks him from reaching the
moon. Depending on the user’s data, the agent either appears
to be scared by the threat or bravely overcomes it.

Sense of purpose and achievement. We investigate users’
sense of purpose using questions adapted from the Purpose-in-
life psychology test [9]. How much interest the user has in life,
how purposeful he feels, and how much personal achievement
on the days investigated decide together the distance from the
agent to the moon and whether the agent will have enough
momentum to travel to it in the end.

Cinematography. Sound design is incorporated to express
the corgi’s affective states: panting during a heavy run, snoring
while sleeping, howling, barking, and so on.

We deploy various camera shots by scripting the Camera game
object in Unity. Four rotating camera angles are used to reveal
progress and the corgi’s intelligence and emotions: a full
frontal shot, a shot from the corgi’s perspective, a close-up and
a side shot. We also created seven special camera shots that are
more relevant for certain subconscious psychological effects.
For example, a Dutch Angle camera (tilted frame so subject is
no longer parallel to the ground), frequently used in ﬁlms to
represent a disorientation, is used in the sleep event to show the
slow loss of consciousness and state of fatigue or drowsiness.
Likewise, in depicting the solitude of the corgi, there is a
camera that slowly rotates above the corgi; here the small
distance serves to detach the viewers from the subject and
emphasize his smallness and loneliness. Several other special
shots, including extreme close ups, panning of the weather,
and more, can also be called when deemed appropriate. Lens
effects include depth-of-ﬁeld blur, recoloring, double focus,
and so on. The result is a subconscious inﬂuence that subtly
controls how the audience is perceiving each scene [13, 14].

GRAPHICAL AFFECTS VALIDATION STUDY
To examine the affective inﬂuence of the animation on the
users, we divided the experiments into two steps. In the ﬁrst
step, we showed users short animated clips and validated that
they perceive the desired emotions from our animation and
cinematographic design. We can’t possibly test all the possible

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 253Page 4Animated Affect

Happiness

Calmness

Is the situation stressful?

Energetic

Sleep quality

Sociable

a) stressed, anxious
b) happy, energetic
c) frustrated, fatigue
d) social and friendly

3.86±2.06
6.23±1.35
1.7±1.12
6.77±0.50

5±1.98
4.73±2.02
2.43±1.48
4.06±1.43

5.33±1.66
2.33±1.65
-
-

-
6.5±0.63
1.3±0.53
-

-
5.9±1.58
1.86±1.16
-

-
6.23±2.01
2.1±1.35
6.36±1.18

Table 1. Results of graphical affects validation survey. For certain clips, certain questions are irrelevant to the affect of interest, so we didn’t ask those
questions and left the table blank. The scores indicate the mean±standard deviation of the Likert scale (from 1 to 7) rating for the corresponding affect.
The higher the score is, the happier/less calm/more energetic/having slept better the agent appears to the user. The ﬁrst column describes the animated
affect in the four clips.

scenes as a result of so many degrees of freedom in each scene,
so we chose four clips that represent four basic affective states.
We call this step "graphical affects validation". In the second
step, we design a user study to examine the effect of the
personalized animated movies.

In the graphical affects validation study, we conduct an online
survey of 30 subjects to evaluate the emotional effects of four
key animation clips, each showing the virtual avatar being a)
stressed and anxious, b) happy and energetic, c) frustrated
and tired and d) sociable and friendly. For example, in the
video clip a), in order to indicate the high degree of stress and
anxiety, the lighting in the forest is dark, the landscape morphs
into obstacles, the background music is eerie, and the agent is
staring at the forest, panting heavily.

The user is then asked to rate corgi’s happiness level, energy
level, stress level, calmness level on a 1-7 Likert scale, and
asked whether they have an experience they can relate to the
video.

Results of graphical affects validation. The results of the
graphical affects validation survey are shown in Table 1. The
results overall conﬁrmed that the intended states were per-
ceived from the animations: On average, video clips b) and d)
have a high happiness score (6.23 and 6.77), while c) has a low
happiness score (1.7). Users are generally able to perceive clip
a) as a stressful situation (5.33), the dog in clip c) as sleepy or
tired (1.86), and the dog in clip d) as sociable (6.36). The T-
test to compare the mean scores of certain perceived emotions
show statistical signiﬁcance with users considering the happi-
ness level in clip d) higher than c) by 3 scales (p<0.001), the
happiness level in clip b) higher than a) by 1 scale (p=0.0019);
the stress level in clip a) higher than b) by 2 scales (p<0.001);
both the energetic level and sleep quality of the agent in video
clip b) are 3-scales higher than c) (p=<0.001, p=0.0029).

The study also revealed some speciﬁc instances of ambiguity
in the animations. The responses of 8 out of 30 users indicated
that it was unclear whether they thought clip a) reﬂects "excite-
ment" or "anxiety" of the dog, while they mostly agreed the
clip depicts "a stressful situation". It suggested that these users
either perceive the stressful situation as a challenge (exited
response) or threat (anxious response). Therefore, we incor-
porated two questions "how stressful was today" and "how
did you handle the stress" in the survey and created different
animations to separate these effects. (See Section 3.1 From
Data to Animation - Stress).

Based on the promising results of graphical affects validation,
we were able to create personalized animated movies with
clips like these as building stones.

A TRIP TO THE MOON: VIDEO STUDY
We conducted a one-week video study to evaluate the motiva-
tional effect of the personalized animated movies. The study
protocol and recruitment process are pre-approved by the MIT
Committee On the Use of Humans as Experimental Subjects
(COUHES).

We sent emails to university labs and dorms, recruiting 27 par-
ticipants aged 18-36. Random assignment was made resulting
in 13 of them assigned to the control group, and 14 to the per-
sonalized group. One participant in the control group dropped
out of the study and asked to have his/her data deleted. All
participants took pre-study surveys including tests on person-
ality, stress level and mental health status. Each day during the
week, participants reported their daily mood and behavioral
data through an online Google Forms survey.

At the end of the week, participants received an animated
movie through email, and were instructed to watch it. Mem-
bers of the personalized group each received a story that was
personalized according to each individual’s mood and behav-
ioral data, while the control group receive a non-personalized
animated video of the same length, featuring a corgi dog ren-
dered from the same models. Considering that the one-line
cues are part of the personalization package, they were only
used in the personalized group. The control video is generated
from real data of a preliminary study participant, showing the
corgi dog running through a forest, facing a stressful rain of
rocks, having one negative and one positive interaction with
another dog and in the end running uphill on a good note.
The control video was picked such that it features some ups
and downs that all participants might relate to their surveyed
experience.

All participants were told the same story: that the video was
customized to their mood and behavior data. After watching
the videos, participants ﬁlled out an evaluation form. There
were three questions that accepted free text-form responses,
without prompting the participants with any of the researcher’s
preconceptions such as "stress" or "social interaction":

• Q1 Ignoring imperfect AI renderings, what do you think

about the story in the video?

• Q2 What do you think about the main character (corgi dog)?

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 253Page 5• Q3 This video is generated from your mood and behavioral
data. What do you think the video reﬂected about you?

FINDINGS
After one week, we received 10 responses to the video through
Google Forms from the 12 people remaining active in the
control group and 13 responses to the video from the 14 people
in the personalized group. We ﬁrst present a quantitative
overview of the results by looking at behavioral measures
such as the lengths of their responses, and then do a thematic
analysis [4] to discuss participants’ emotional engagement,
connection to the agent and change in self-reﬂection.

Two researchers ﬁrst read the responses with the research ques-
tions in mind, blinded to conditions, and came up with four
quantitative cross-group comparisons. One researcher then
coded the responses manually, blinded to conditions. First,
we looked at how many participants in each group showed
confusion about the story, by saying "I was confused", "not
clear what is happening". Second, we compared the average
length of response in two groups. Third, we counted how many
emotion-descriptive (e.g. "emotional", "nostalgic") words they
used to describe themselves. Fourth, we compared if they re-
called a past experience from the animation. The comparison
results are listed in Table 2. The results speak positively about
the engaging effect of personalized animations (less confusing,
more emotionally engaging, inducing lengthier writings and
more recalling of past experiences), but are not statistically
signiﬁcant.

Considering that simple quantitative measures as above don’t
capture the full picture, we read the responses and found
that participants’ responses fell into three types: indifferent,
intrigued, affected, based on the length of their response and
whether they connected the animation to themselves.

Indifferent. Participants who were indifferent showed confu-
sion and negativity when asked what they think of the story.
To Q1, they replied with confusion. To Q3, they denied that
the video represents or reﬂects them and didn’t relate the
video to their personal experience. Their answers are all brief,
adding up to fewer than around 80 words (M=42.8, SD=27.1),
showing a low level of engagement.

Intrigued. Participants who were intrigued provided their
interpretation of the story to Q1. They had some connec-
tion with the agent by describing the corgi dog with positive
words such as "cute", "expressive". They wrote short but posi-
tive answers, the total word count was fewer than around 80
(M=40.1, SD=26.6). They were able to discover one or two
self-reﬂections.

Invested. Participants who were invested used the most
emotion-related words to describe their feelings for the video.
They wrote the longest answers, ranging from around 80 to
over 300 words (M=127, SD=93.9, the big standard deviation
due to the long tail of long responses). They described a strong
personal connection with the agent and could describe mul-
tiple reﬂections on their experiences and personalities. The
deﬁning factors of the three types of response are summarized
in Table 3.

Group

Confused

Word Count

Emotion

Recall

Control
Personalized
P-values

50% 71.3 ± 45.7
30.8% 84.5 ± 95.4

2.2 ± 2.5
3.3 ± 3.0

60%
84.6%

All > 0.1

Table 2. Comparison between the control group and the personalized
group. Confused refers to the percentage of users showing confusion
about the story (e.g. By saying "Don’t know what’s going on", "I am
confused"). Word count is the group average of word count. Emotion
refers to the average number of emotion-descriptive words (e.g. "emo-
tional", "happy", "nostalgic") the user used in their response. Recall
refers to the percentage of participants recalling past experiences corre-
sponding to the animation in the group.

Type of response

Indifferent

Intrigued

Invested

Word count
Confusion
Described emotions they felt
Wrote self-reﬂection

< 80
No
Yes
Yes
Table 3. Three types of responses to the video.

< 80
Yes
No
No

> 80
No
Yes
Yes

Figure 4. Distribution of three types of responses among the two study
groups.

The distribution of the three types of responses in the two
study groups is shown in Fig. 4. While the overall study is lim-
ited to a relatively small number of people, we can see higher
intrigued and invested frequencies in the personalized group
than in the control group. Half (5 out of 10) participants in the
control group showed indifference about the video, while only
1 out of 13 participants in the personalized group showed indif-
ference. The difference in types of responses in the two groups
is statistically signiﬁcant (p=0.036 at conﬁdence level 0.95) us-
ing an independent-samples unequal-variance t-test. The result
suggests that while participants in both groups try to reﬂect
on their behavior when told the video is generated from their
personal data, the personalized videos were more interpretable
and successful in terms of eliciting personal reﬂection than
was a generic, non-personalized animation (even though the
participants in both groups were told it was "personalized".)

Emotional engagement, or "beautifully poignant."
Below demonstrate the effect of personalized animation with
examples. We mostly list responses from the personalized
group, omitting those of the control group, half of which de-
scribe confusion and indifference anyway. Interested readers

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 253Page 6can refer to this online database for a full collection of partici-
pant responses.

made sense... It was just a little jarring to come face to face
with." (19, female, P).

Among the intrigued and invested participants, emotion re-
sponses range from low arousal ("calm") to high arousal ("su-
per excited"), low valence ("sad", "didn’t like") to high valence
("glad"), and more complex emotions such as nostalgia and
independence. Below are some answers to Q1, "what do you
think about the story", from participants whose age, gender
and group (P for personalized, C for control) are included in
brackets.

Happy: "I feel glad that the corgi was able to walk on the
moon after a few chapters featuring ups and downs." (25,
male, P)

Sad: "It made me feel nostalgic and at some points a little
sad." (18, male, P) "It seemed kind of aimless and repetitive at
times, but was also beautifully poignant at others." (19, male,
P)

Calm: "I feel calm and relaxed." (30, male, P)

Unsettling: "It was scary and unsettling in the middle, but the
nice music as I/the dog chilled on the moon made it slightly
better." (19, female, P)

Dynamic and evolving: "The very beginning made me super
excited, because corgis are great and I recognized the phrases
I entered. I could tell the story began happily. The video
certainly dipped into a spooky atmosphere, and I felt anxious
watching the corgi become separated from its friend by a wall
of rocks. The middle made me nervous that something was
going to pop out on the screen. The end greatly confused
me, and I felt neither happy nor sad. But it seemed the corgi
wanted to reach the moon all along, and it ﬁnally achieved its
goal." (20, female, P)

Denial of one’s behavior. Some participants were engaged
by the story, but showed a negative taste for certain behaviors
of the agent. "I didn’t like the story. The corgi didn’t really
interact with the other dog and was alone at the end." (19,
male, P)

This attitude of denial indicates that the participant might have
felt self-conscious or offended when seeing their undesired
behaviors animated on a character. The same participant re-
sponded, "I have a hard time connecting with others," when
asked about his self-reﬂection in Q3. This response is consis-
tent with the behavior he disliked of the agent. It suggests that
seeing a truthful reﬂection of one’s undesired behavior could
be a relatively unpleasant emotional experience.

From this exploration, and the seriousness with which partici-
pants reﬂected based on this automated animated portrayal of
their data, we believe that personalized story videos should,
carefully balance the unpleasantness with hope and positivity.
We do not wish to have videos presenting bad mood or un-
wanted behavior data leave a participant unable to overcome
the initial discomfort; rather, we want to enable them to emo-
tionally reﬂect, but then also to feel motivated to change their
behavior. As another participant pointed out, "I was kind of
shocked to see things suddenly get dark, but I think it also

Notice that certain participants in the control group (5/10) were
also emotionally invested in the video. One participant wrote
"It left me with this feeling like I can be independent which is
something I’m also working on after years of being dependent
on signiﬁcant others and because I’m still recovering from
a hard break-up, seeing the corgi realize he didn’t (rely on)
the other dog to be happy made me happy." (22, female, C)
We consider such high engagement with the video to be a
positive sign that our animation and cinematographic design
were successful in connecting emotionally with viewers.

Connection to the agent, or "I/the corgi"
We analyzed the participants’ empathy for the agent by looking
at replies to Q3, "What do you think about the corgi dog?"

Of the 13 participants in the personalized group, 8 directly
described their connection to the dog. "The dog seemed kind
of lonely for most of the video. For some reason (maybe its
facial expression and tongue ﬂapping) the dog appeared naive
and kind of stupid to me, but also always hopeful. I felt a
deep emotional connection to the dog at times." (19, male,
P) "I like it, it is cute and expressive." (18, male, P) "The
corgi is adorable. I was sad when the dog looked sad/sleepy.
While watching it, I thought of how I could make the corgi
happier and then at the end, it was so happy :D" (22, female,
P) One participant showed that they identiﬁed with the agent
by referring to them and the agent as the same entity: "I/the
dog chilled on the Moon".

Some participants’ attitude towards the agent was more de-
scriptive of what they saw it looked like and less descriptive of
their personal connection. "His mood changes very quickly."
(19, male, P) "Temperamental." (21, female, P) An 18-year-old
female participant (P) considered the dog "high", which was
not one of the intended states, although it could be possible to
also ask participants about their drug and alcohol behavior and
reﬂect such use on their avatar. A 19-year-old male participant
(C) said the agent "has communication and social intelligence
problems". His reply to Q3, "That I was confused and in a
mentally bad place," seems to indicate that he may have em-
pathized with the agent’s visually-demonstrated challenges
and problems.

Self-reﬂection, or "needs more friends"
The one-line reminders provided daily by each participant
appeared as chapter titles in their personalized animations,
which served as memory retrieval cues. Two participants
explicitly commented on the effect of the retrieval cues, "I
was also vaguely amazed at how well I could recall each day
based on the words in the chapter names <- which also kept
me invested, because I knew it was me." (19, female, P) "The
very beginning made me super excited, because corgis are
great and I recognized the phrases I entered." (20, female, P)

Participants independently came to conclusions about their
mood behavior pattern when answering Q3 "what do you
think the video reﬂected about you". Notice that they were not
prompted to write about "friends", "exercise" or "stress", nor

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 253Page 7was there any text in the animation indicating that a particular
scene was about a certain behavior. In other words, the re-
ﬂections were solely based on their understanding of the story
world and memory of doing the surveys.

Overall mood. "It reﬂected that I have been fairly happy the
past couple of days." (30, male, P)

"I’ve been through a lot recently, but try to keep my head up
and can do so because of my friends." (21, female, C)

"Mostly happy with some occasional stress, maybe the in-
teraction with the other dog represents an interaction with
another person, also I sometimes think of my personality as a
geometrically rendered dog." (20, female, C)

Social life. The animated video portrayed the self-reported
social interactions as interactions between their avatar and
another dog, prompting some to reﬂect on their social life
and its interaction with their mood. A number of participants
reﬂected in writing on aspects of their social life that need
improvement, such as loneliness and isolation. "I have a
hard time connection with others." (19, male, P) "Needs more
friends." (18, female, P) "When I isolate myself, I tend to
be sad and unproductive. I sometimes need time away from
people, but that can turn into a negative thing when there’s too
much of it." (19, female, C) "The presence of other dogs seems
to reﬂect how my mood strongly depends on my interactions
with other people. When the corgi got walled off by all those
rocks, I was reminded how lonely I feel when I go without
human interaction for too long." (20, female, P)

Stress. When there was a stress scene in the personalized
videos, participants were usually able to identify the tense
atmosphere and connect it with their stressful experience. "The
wall of rocks also corresponded well with all the homework I
received this past week." (20, female, P) "That I am sometimes
calm and collected but other times I am overwhelmed by stress
and wants to run away/not know how to handle the stress."
(22, female, P) One participant (P) was, however, unable to
identify the source of the stress, "(The video reﬂects) that I’m
angry?? It made the world seem very scary and out to get me.
Why was this dog on a planet in the middle of nowhere with
hostile boulders and angry other dogs?"

Sleep and exercise. Fewer participants discovered the rela-
tionship between sleep, exercise, and mood. One 18-year-old
male participant (P) thought he could have been more "active",
which could either refer to a mental or physical state. No
participant mentioned "sleep", though some of them had very
irregular sleeping schedules, causing the agent to appear tired
and fall asleep often in the video.

It is interesting how certain participants also came to a conclu-
sion about mental states that are not included in the surveys,
and thus not intentionally included in the animations. In other
words, some thought that the animated video, or the system
behind it, had the intelligence to speculate on their "hidden
states:"

"The video also implies I’m more of a follower, since I’m not
the type to push people to do things. I’m not sure what the

moon represents, but if the video is trying to imply I space out
a lot, it’d be very correct." (20, female, P)

"I’ve mostly been around people this week, but sometimes,
I do feel a little lonely off and on; I’m surprised the video
caught that even though there’s no question asking if I feel
lonely, so I’m impressed that this "AI" somehow captured that
vulnerability in me." (22, female, C)

DISCUSSION
Focus on behaviors of interest. In order to better represent
each user’s past week, also in response to users’ request in the
preliminary study, our video study involved mood and four
types of behaviors. As a result, it was harder for participants
to intuitively understand how their sleep and exercise affected
the story. Future videos can try to focus on fewer dimensions
of data and dedicate the story to emphasize the largest change
in the data, or a change that the user speciﬁes is of particular
interest to them. Slight changes to the automation algorithm
could enable their personal animation to function as a kind of
ampliﬁer of the behaviors on which they most want to reﬂect.

Balance hope and negativity. Emotionally engaging stories
require the alternation of ups and downs in the agent’s expe-
riences, and can either have a happy ending or a sad ending.
However, for some audiences, the negative part of the story is
more difﬁcult to come face to face with. Certain participants
found the dark part of the story "jarring", "scary" and "unset-
tling". Our study ﬁndings suggest that while negativity might
seem discouraging to some individuals, it can be carefully
balanced with positivity and the hope to change. Future work
needs to consider how to handle this balance when all the data
from the participant is negative.

As movie creators, we are not constrained by any set of rules
to present the emotions of the movie. As a result, we have the
ability to "manipulate" users’ perception of their behaviors.
We can zoom in on a positive experience or dwell on a negative
one, depending on the desired cognitive and psychological
response. Future studies can dig more into these effects on a
personalized basis.

Judging good work The above discussion naturally leads
to the question: what do we deﬁne as "good" personalized
animation? From our interaction with participants, we see
personalized animation potentially serving different purposes:
self-reﬂection, changing behavior, or even communication of
emotions. Depending on the purpose, the standards for "good
personalized animation" can vary. Generally, a good person-
alized video should be able to elicit curiosity and empathy
- viewers keep anticipating what happens next out of com-
passion for the characters (themselves); subsequently, what
designers want users to do with that feeling can be tailored
from case to case.

Limitations. The results here should be taken with some
caution, as our sample size was small and the study was con-
ducted only for one week for each of the 27 participants. Our
next steps will involve longer studies where we validate par-
ticipants’ behavior change in the long term (usually months).
The current system can support an emotionally-engaging, 6-
8 minute animation for one individual. However, will the

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 253Page 8believability of the story decrease when users see repetitive
content, especially when some people have routines so that
their weekly data is really similar? To increase believability,
we currently try to randomize the agent’s path on the land-
scape. In the future we will also enlarge the animation and
model database to provide more visible dynamics.

From our post-study survey of 27 participants, the average
interest in watching more videos from future data is 5.25 on a
Likert scale of 1 to 7, indicating that they are curious overall
to see changes in their personal animation story when their
behaviors and experiences change. Moving forward, we will
investigate emotional engagement and behavior change in-
duced by personalized animated movies delivered periodically
(such as weekly or monthly). We will look at their interactions
with the animations and how impact on their feelings changes
over time. We will also try to measure emotional engagement
by more objective signals than the current self-reported data,
including facial expressions, and sensor-based measures such
as electrodermal responsivity. Behavioral measures such as
whether participants have shared their video with friends and
family can also be used. Objective signals measured over the
course of a day, including physical activity and sleep activity
as well, can be combined with written responses to provide a
more complete affective-cognitive-physical state assessment.

CONCLUSION
Converting personal data into a format that can have emotional
impact can potentially fuel motivation for self-reﬂection and
positive behavior change; however, a fully-automated system
is not capable today of understanding human personal expe-
riences at the kind of level that could make such a story both
explicit and accurate. To solve this challenge, we built an au-
tomated system to construct an animation that is personalized
to the data provided by an individual over a week, utilizing
an animated avatar (corgi) that implicitly reﬂects the person’s
behaviors, such as sleep and social interactions, and moods
associated with each day of the week. We conducted two stud-
ies: The ﬁrst found that the avatar’s portrayal of a set of moods
and behaviors could be perceived accurately in general. The
second study tested the emotional engagement of using a per-
sonalized story against a challenging control: a similar story
that they were told was personalized. The results indicated
that personalized animations tended to be more emotionally
engaging, encouraging greater and lengthier writing that indi-
cated self-reﬂection about moods and behaviors. Furthermore,
while human imagination plays an important and valuable part
in both conditions – test and control – the impact we found
suggests that true personalization may be more powerfully
inﬂuential on moods and self-reﬂection than simply believing
that one is receiving personalized feedback.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research was partially supported by the Advancing Well-
being Initiative at the MIT Media Lab. We thank Asma Ghan-
deharioun, Weixuan (Vincent) Chen and Sam Spaulding for
comments that greatly improved the manuscript, and 3 "anony-
mous" reviewers for their insights in presenting the research
methodology and results.

REFERENCES

1. Ruth A Baer, Gregory T Smith, Jaclyn Hopkins, Jennifer
Krietemeyer, and Leslie Toney. 2006. Using self-report
assessment methods to explore facets of mindfulness.
Assessment 13, 1 (2006), 27–45.

2. Joseph Bates and others. 1994. The role of emotion in

believable agents. Commun. ACM 37, 7 (1994), 122–125.

3. Todd Bentley, Lorraine Johnston, and Karola von Baggo.

2005. Evaluation using cued-recall debrief to elicit
information about a user’s affective experiences. In
Proceedings of the 17th Australia conference on
Computer-Human Interaction: Citizens Online:
Considerations for Today and the Future.
Computer-Human Interaction Special Interest Group
(CHISIG) of Australia, 1–10.

4. Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using

Thematic Analysis in Psychology. 3 (01 2006), 77–101.

5. Jean Costa, Alexander T Adams, Malte F Jung, François

Guimbetiere, and Tanzeem Choudhury. 2016.
EmotionCheck: leveraging bodily signals and false
feedback to regulate our emotions. In Proceedings of the
2016 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive
and Ubiquitous Computing. ACM, 758–769.

6. Gustav Freytag. 1896. Freytag’s technique of the drama:
an exposition of dramatic composition and art. Scholarly
Press.

7. Stefan Göbel, Sandro Hardy, Viktor Wendel, Florian
Mehm, and Ralf Steinmetz. 2010. Serious games for
health: personalized exergames. In Proceedings of the
18th ACM international conference on Multimedia. ACM,
1663–1666.

8. Anton Gustafsson, Magnus Bång, and Mattias Svahn.

2009. Power explorer: a casual game style for
encouraging long term behavior change among teenagers.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Advances in Computer Enterntainment Technology. ACM,
182–189.

9. Lisa L Harlow, Michael D Newcomb, and Peter M

Bentler. 1986. Depression, self-derogation, substance use,
and suicide ideation: Lack of purpose in life as a
mediational factor. Journal of clinical psychology 42, 1
(1986), 5–21.

10. Kristina Höök. 2009. Affective loop experiences:

designing for interactional embodiment. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London B:
Biological Sciences 364, 1535 (2009), 3585–3595.

11. Katherine Isbister, Kia Höök, Jarmo Laaksolahti, and

Michael Sharp. 2007. The sensual evaluation instrument:
Developing a trans-cultural self-report measure of affect.
International journal of human-computer studies 65, 4
(2007), 315–328.

12. John F Kihlstrom, Eric Eich, Deborah Sandbrand, and

Betsy A Tobias. 2000. Emotion and memory:
Implications for self-report. The science of self-report:
Implications for research and practice (2000), 81–99.

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 253Page 913. Kurt Lancaster. 2011. The Psychology of the Lens:

Patrick Moreau creates ﬁlmic intimacy with DSLRs at
Stillmotion. (June 2011).

14. Kurt Lancaster. 2017. Using lenses to enhance visual

storytelling. (January 2017).

15. Madelene Lindström, Anna Ståhl, Kristina Höök, Petra
Sundström, Jarmo Laaksolathi, Marco Combetto, Alex
Taylor, and Roberto Bresin. 2006. Affective diary:
designing for bodily expressiveness and self-reﬂection. In
CHI’06 extended abstracts on Human factors in
computing systems. ACM, 1037–1042.

16. Michael Mateas and Phoebe Sengers. 2003. Narrative

intelligence. (2003).

17. Robert R McCrae. 1984. Situational determinants of

coping responses: Loss, threat, and challenge. Journal of
personality and Social Psychology 46, 4 (1984), 919.

18. David R Michael and Sandra L Chen. 2005. Serious

games: Games that educate, train, and inform. Muska &
Lipman/Premier-Trade.

19. Rosalind W Picard and Shaundra Bryant Daily. 2005.

Evaluating affective interactions: Alternatives to asking
what users feel. In CHI Workshop on Evaluating Affective
Interfaces: Innovative Approaches. ACM New York, NY,
2119–2122.

20. Rosalind W Picard and Roalind Picard. 1997. Affective

computing. Vol. 252. MIT press Cambridge.

21. Tom Porter and Galyn Susman. 2000. On site: Creating
lifelike characters in pixar movies. Commun. ACM 43, 1
(2000), 25.

22. Hans Rosling. 2006. Debunking third-world myths with

the best stats you’ve ever seen. TED.

23. Christian Roth, Peter Vorderer, and Christoph Klimmt.

2009. The motivational appeal of interactive storytelling:

Towards a dimensional model of the user experience. In
Joint International Conference on Interactive Digital
Storytelling. Springer, 38–43.

24. Akane Sano. 2016. Measuring college students’ sleep,
stress, mental health and wellbeing with wearable
sensors and mobile phones. Ph.D. Dissertation.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

25. Corina Sas, Tomasz Fratczak, Matthew Rees, Hans

Gellersen, Vaiva Kalnikaite, Alina Coman, and Kristina
Höök. 2013. AffectCam: arousal-augmented sensecam
for richer recall of episodic memories. In CHI’13
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems. ACM, 1041–1046.

26. Phoebe Sengers, Kirsten Boehner, Shay David, and
Joseph’Joﬁsh’ Kaye. 2005. Reﬂective design. In
Proceedings of the 4th decennial conference on Critical
computing: between sense and sensibility. ACM, 49–58.

27. Phoebe Sengers and Bill Gaver. 2006. Staying open to

interpretation: engaging multiple meanings in design and
evaluation. In Proceedings of the 6th conference on
Designing Interactive systems. ACM, 99–108.
28. CR Snyder, Randee J Shenkel, and Carol R Lowery.
1977. Acceptance of personality interpretations: the"
Barnum Effect" and beyond. Journal of consulting and
clinical psychology 45, 1 (1977), 104.

29. Frank Thomas, Ollie Johnston, and Frank. Thomas. 1995.
The illusion of life: Disney animation. Hyperion New
York.

30. AJN Van Breemen. 2004. Bringing robots to life:
Applying principles of animation to robots. In
Proceedings of Shapping Human-Robot Interaction
workshop held at CHI 2004. 143–144.

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 253Page 10