A Wee Bit More Interaction: Designing and Evaluating  
an Overactive Bladder App

Ana-Maria Salai 
 Heriot-Watt University 
 Edinburgh, UK 
 as152@hw.ac.uk 

Lynne Baillie 
 Heriot-Watt University 
 Edinburgh, UK 
 l.baillie@hw.ac.uk

ABSTRACT 

Overactive  Bladder  (OAB)  is  a  widespread  condition, 
affecting  20%  of  the  population.  Even  though  it  is  a 
treatable  condition,  people  often  do  not  seek  treatment.  In 
this paper, we  describe how we co-designed and evaluated 
with  30  stakeholders  (9  medical  professionals  and  21  end-
users)  an  OAB  mobile  health  application  that  aims  to 
increase  adherence  to  self-managed  treatment.  Our  results 
support previous research that visualizing progress, setting 
goals, receiving reminders and feedback  increases  use.  We 
discovered  that  games  could  be  used  successfully  as  a 
distraction technique for urge suppression. Contrary to the 
current research direction, automatically calculated features 
could  be  a  detriment  to  app 
interaction.  Regarding 
evaluation,  we  found  that  designers  may  not  want  to  rely 
only  on  questionnaires  when  assessing  the  success  of  a 
game and its emotional impact on users. 

CCS CONCEPTS 
• Human-centered  computing  ~  User  studies;  Usability  Testing; 
Field Studies 

KEYWORDS 
Mobile  Health  Applications;  Assistive  Technology;  Co-Design; 
Interviews; Usability; Overactive Bladder 

ACM Reference format: 

Ana-Maria  Salai  and  Lynne  Baillie.  2019.  A  Wee  Bit  More  Interaction: 
Designing  and  Evaluating  an  Overactive  Bladder  App.  In  2019  CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings (CHI 2019), 
May 4–9, 2019, Glagsow, Scotland, UK. ACM,  NY,  NY,  USA.  Paper  703,  13 
pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300933 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM 
must  be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior  specific 
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org). 
CHI 2019, May 4-9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UK. 
© 2019 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5970-2/19/05...$15.00. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300933 

1  INTRODUCTION 
The  number  of  people  suffering  from  Overactive  Bladder 
(OAB)  worldwide  is expected  to reach 20.1% by  the end of 
2018  [31].  The  condition 
incurs  high  direct  costs 
(treatment), indirect costs (low productivity) and intangible 
costs  (quality  of  life)  [18].  OAB  is  a  treatable  condition  as 
70%  of  people  can  be  cured  or  have  their  symptoms 
ameliorated  [1].  However,  it  remains  undertreated  due  to 
people not seeking treatment, lack of proactive questioning 
by physicians and embarrassment [1]. Moreover, traditional 
treatment requires  motivation  and  involvement, leading to 
a  drop  out  whenever  results  are  not  quickly  seen  [10,  56]. 
Smartphones  are  popular  ubiquitous  devices,  with  78%  of 
UK  adults  using  one  [53].  By  often  interacting  with  them, 
people create a personal bond with the devices [60]. Given 
their  computing  capabilities,  smartphones  can  recognize 
behavior patterns and provide real-time interventions [36]. 
As  people  with  OAB  need  assistance  wherever  they  are,  a 
mobile health (mHealth) app could be an appropriate tool to 
increase  adherence  to  self-managed  treatment  and  raise 
awareness of symptoms.   

Since the app intends to act as a personal tool, we followed 
a  co-design  methodology  to  investigate  what  features 
would best fit OAB users’ needs. This approach has proved 
successful 
in  health  areas  such  as  falls  [58],  knee 
rehabilitation [2], and cancer treatment [33]. We conducted 
three  studies  with  key  stakeholders:  people  with  OAB, 
continence  specialist  nurses,  and  medical  consultants.  We 
wished  to  answer  the  following  research  questions  (RQ): 
RQ1: What key features should an OAB mHealth app have 
to  support  people  during  self-managed  treatment?  RQ2: 
How  might  an  OAB  app  help  people  self-manage  their 
treatment  and  raise  awareness  of  symptoms?  RQ3:  Does 
context have an impact on how users engage with the app?  

This paper is structured as follows. We start by providing a 
background  overview  of  OAB  and  mHealth  app  research 
studies.  We  then  present  the  three  studies  we  conducted: 
Study  1:  requirements  gathering  interviews  with  all 
stakeholders;  Study  2: 
interviews  whilst  stakeholders 
interacted  with  the  proposed  app  prototype;  and  Study 3: 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 703Page 1 
evaluating the app’s usability and the user experience (UX) 
during  a  short exploratory field  study  with end-users.  The 
outcomes  from  the  three  studies  are  then  discussed  in  the 
context  of  our three RQs,  before  outlining  our conclusions 
and  proposed  future  work.  Some  of  the  findings  from  the 
first  two  studies  have  been  published  in  [51].  University 
ethical approval was granted for all studies. We will refer to 
people  with  OAB  symptoms  taking  part  in  the  studies  as 
user participants (UP) and medical participants as MP. 

2  BACKGROUND 
In  this  section,  we  present  the  OAB  condition  and  its 
treatment. We then outline the current research in the area 
of  mHealth  apps.  Finally,  derived  from  the  literature,  we 
highlight key issues surrounding OAB that could be used to 
support users.  

2.1  Overactive Bladder 

OAB  is  defined  as  frequency  (more  than  eight  voids  per 
day),  urgency (with  or  without  incontinence)  and nocturia 
(more  than  two voids per night) [20].  The first assessment 
stage  consists  of  bladder  diaries  and  quality  of  life 
questionnaires  [20].  Patients  are  asked  to  fill  in  a  paper-
based bladder diary (Fig. 6 right) for three consecutive days, 
in  which  they  record:  when,  what,  and  how  much  liquid 
they  drank  (mls  or  cups),  when  and  how  much  they 
urinated (mls), the urge to urinate, and any leakages [20].  

Although  drugs  are  available  to  ameliorate  the  symptoms, 
due  to  their  side-effects  (dry  mouth,  constipation,  blurred 
vision)  [1],  medical  staff  are  advised  to  suggest  non-
pharmacological  therapies  first  (e.g.,  lifestyle  changes, 
Pelvic  Floor  Muscle  (PFM)  training,  and  bladder  training). 
The  lifestyle changes  consist  of  avoiding  bladder  irritants 
(certain  food  and  drinks)  and  consuming  a  proper  amount 
of liquid per day. The PFM training consists of performing 
daily PFM exercises. The bladder training is composed of 
extending  the  time  between  voids  by  applying  urge 
suppression  techniques  to  try  and  avoid  rushing  to  the 
toilet  whenever  there  is  an  urge  to  urinate.  These 
techniques are divided into brain distraction techniques (e.g., 
trying to take the mind off the urge), and performing quick 
PFM contractions [20].   

2.2  Mobile Health Applications 
Different  approaches  have  been  used  when  designing  and 
evaluating mHealth apps. Geurts et al. [22] designed an app 
for cardiac patients with medical staff. Owen et al. [44] used 
scenarios  based  on  prior  health  research  when  developing 
an  app  to  support  the  self-management  of  people  with 
chronic conditions. Although they evaluated the apps with 

end-users,  they  did  not  involve  them  in  the  design. 
Hakobyan et al. [26] developed an app for older adults with 
age-related  macular  degeneration  and 
involved  both 
medical  staff and end-users  in  the  design phase. Later,  the 
authors  evaluated  the  app  by  conducting  both  controlled 
and  field  studies.  Micallef  et  al.  [38]  co-designed  an  app 
with stroke survivors to assist with upper arm therapy. The 
authors  conducted  a  design  workshop  with  end-users  and 
medical  staff  and  evaluated  the  app’s  usability  in  a 
controlled field study. Matthews et al. [37] co-developed an 
app  with  people  with  bipolar  disorder  and  highlight  that 
people are aware of the stigma surrounding their condition.  

Given the new technological possibilities, smartphones can 
provide  personalized  context,  understand  the  user  and  the 
environment to offer better UX [19]. The Mobilyze! system 
[11]  collects  accelerometer,  GPS,  Bluetooth,  WIFI,  and 
ambient light to determine the physical and social behavior 
of patients with depression. In the MONARCA project [48], 
the smartphone collected data such as speech duration and 
number  of  calls  to  determine  the  social  activity,  and 
acceleration  for  the physical activity recognition of bipolar 
disorder patients.  

Several OAB apps referring to either bladder diaries or PFM 
exercises  are  currently  available  on  the  market.  Although 
some have involved medical staff in the design process [55], 
none  of  them  mention  any  end-user  involvement  [35,  43]. 
PFM  exercise  apps  provide  customizable  exercises  plans 
[55], professional video tutorials on how to do the exercises 
[43, 55], discreet reminders [43, 35], show progress [43, 55], 
and  encourage  users  to  stay  motivated  by  unlocking 
achievements  [43,  35].  The  bladder  diary  apps  track 
progress by showing a comparison between pre- and post-
therapy results [57] and require precise urine quantities [57, 
30].  Our  app  differs  from  the  other  OAB  apps  in  the 
following  ways:  (1)  it  has  been  co-designed  with  potential 
end-users,  (2)  it  brings  together  several  parts  of  the  non-
pharmacological  treatment  and  diagnosis,  (3)  it  aims  to 
collect  environmental  sensors  data  that  could  offer  a  high 
level of personalization, (4) it offers a variety of distractions 
such  as  games,  (5)  it  uses  urine  quantity  approximations 
and (6) provides reminders for more than one function.  

2.3  Key Concepts to Support in an OAB App 

treatments  are  well 
Although  non-pharmacological 
accepted  by  medical  staff,  they  are  time-consuming  and 
require motivation. Therefore, people often fail to adhere to 
the  treatment  [10,  56].  Moreover,  people  with  OAB  often 
feel  embarrassed  and  would  prefer  to  keep  the  condition 
private  [10].  Below  we  discuss  issues  highlighted  in  the 
literature that could be part of an OAB app. 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 703Page 2 
 
Progress: Low adherence to treatment is an issue not only 
related  to  OAB,  as  other  research  investigating  knee  [2], 
falls  [58]  and  stroke  rehabilitation  [38]  provided  similar 
findings.  To  overcome  this,  Ayoade  and  Baillie  [2] 
recognized  the  importance  of  showing  progress  and 
improvement 
to  patients.  Similarly,  displaying  user 
achievements  also proved effective  for  people  with bipolar 
disorder [37]. Choe et al. [15] reviewed self-tracking apps to 
understand  what  data  people  track  and  discovered  that 
visualizing data using line and bar charts is very useful.  

Reminders:  Another  method  of  increasing  adherence  to 
treatment is by providing users with reminders. Reminders 
proved  effective  in  increasing  medication  adherence  for 
HIV patients [49],  increasing exercise adherence for stroke 
survivors  during  rehabilitation  [38],  and  in  persuading 
people  to  drink  a  proper  amount  of  water  [14].  Min  et  al. 
[41] show how mobile instant messengers (e.g., WhatsApp) 
do  not consider  social  appropriateness, making people  feel 
embarrassed by  an  unexpected exposure of  their  incoming 
messages. Matthews et al. [37] discovered that people with 
bipolar  disorder  are  embarrassed  by  their  condition  and 
would like reminder alerts to be discreet when using an app 
for their condition.  

Since  urge 

suppression 
Distraction  Techniques: 
techniques  are  very  important  for  a  successful  bladder 
training,  we  considered  it  useful  to  investigate  what 
activities  we  could  provide  to  distract  people.  Games,  for 
example,  have  proved  to  be  successful  in  rehabilitation 
areas such as  falls [59] or  in promoting healthier  lifestyles 
[25, 14]. Ploderer et  al. [46] developed an app that enabled 
people  trying  to  quit  smoking  to  access  and  share 
distractions  and  tips.  However,  these  did  not  work  as  the 
smokers  said  that  they  were  not  distracting  enough,  and 
they continued to smoke while using the app.  

Embarrassment: Embarrassment is an important emotion 
that  plays  a  significant  role  in  how  people  interact  in  a 
society  [40].  Healey  et  al.  [29]  evaluated  various  graphical 
user  interfaces  for  capturing  emotions  on  a  smartphone. 
Wilson  et al. [62]  investigated  the  modalities of conveying 
emotions  by  means  of  visual,  thermal  and  vibrotactile 
feedback.  Although  technology  is  evolving,  more  research 
needs to be conducted in the HCI community in the area of 
emotions  [16].  Given  the  fact  that  people  do  not  seek 
medical  help  due  to  embarrassment  and  prefer  to  remain 
anonymous [52], we decided to investigate if people would 
like any elements to be designed discreetly.  

Location: People with OAB tend to perform their activities 
close to toilet locations to avoid leakages and embarrassing 

situations [32]. Considering  this,  we  wanted  to discuss  the 
issue of toilets and location, and how the app could assist.  

Bladder Diary: A bladder diary is a form of assessment. A 
drawback to this practice is that people often show a lack of 
interest  in  filling  in  health  diaries  [61].  We  wanted  to 
understand whether people fail in filling in bladder diaries.   

3  STUDY 1 – REQUIREMENTS GATHERING 

INTERVIEWS 

We  conducted 
interviews  with  MPs  and  co-design 
interviews  with  UPs  to  discuss  the  main  functions  and 
features  derived  from  literature  review  and  to  understand 
what  additional  features  would  be  best  for  OAB  users. 
Interviews  were  composed  of  both  quantitative  and 
qualitative  questions.  Qualitative  answers  were  analyzed 
using  an  adapted  version  of  the  Constant  Comparative 
Method  [4],  initially  part  of  Grounded  Theory  [23].  We 
used this method to avoid exclusions on thematic grounds. 

3.1  Medical Participants 

3.1.1 Methodology. We  started  with  MPs  interviews  as  we 
wished  to  understand  whether  they  agreed  with  the 
concepts  derived  from  the  literature  and  whether  they 
would  suggest  additional  ones.  We  interviewed  four  MPs: 
two  medical  consultants 
two  urinary 
continence specialist nurses (MP3-4). Three interviews were 
conducted  via  telephone  and  one  face-to-face  (MP2).  Each 
interview lasted one hour and was divided into three phases 
(Table 1). 

(MP1-2)  and 

3.1.2  Findings.  Phase  1:  People  delay  seeking  treatment 
because  they  develop  their  own  way  of  dealing  with  the 
condition.  For  example,  they  either  tend  to  change  their 
daily  routine  to  avoid  embarrassing  incidents  in  public 
spaces:  “Going  from  toilet  to  toilet.  Use  pads.”  (MP4)  or 
drastically  reduce  their  fluid  intake:  “Some people end up 
dehydrated.”  (MP3).  MPs  believe  people  mostly  want  an 
easy  treatment  with  a  quick  outcome:  “Patients want  an 
easy answer to their problem – magic solution, magic tablet.” 
(MP2),  leading  to  a  low  adherence  to  treatment  [10,  56]: 
“Frustration that it doesn’t work fast or at all.” (MP1). 

Phase 2:  As  indicated  in  [20],  in  the  UK,  urologists  often 
use  bladder  diaries  and  questionnaires  for  diagnosis.  As 
shown in [61], people fail to fill in these diaries.  

Phase 3: All MPs interviewed agreed with the app concepts 
obtained from our literature review. The only contradiction 
found  was  regarding  the  toilet  mapping  concept,  where 
both  nurses  disagreed  with  the  medical  consultants  and 
questioned  the  usefulness  of  the  concept:  “It should be used 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 703Page 3 
 
 
 
as a backup plan and not to ease their access to toilets. Going 
to the toilet just in case needs to be avoided.”  (MP3).  Finally, 
MPs  requested  that  we  include  a  treatment  description  in 
our app. 

Table 1. Medical Participants – Interview Structure. 

Phase 

Content 
Phase 1 OAB Condition 
Issues and challenges. 
Treatment and diagnosis. 
Phase 2 Treatment 
Phase 3 Mobile Phone App  Literature review concepts. 

3.2  User Participants 

3.2.1 Methodology.  During  our  MPs  interviews,  we  asked 
about how we should approach our co-design with UPs. We 
were advised to use single or same gender paired interviews 
and  not  to  use  any  group-based  techniques  (e.g.,  focus 
group, design  workshops). We interviewed nine UPs  -  two 
males and seven females (UP1-9) since the OAB prevalence 
is  higher  in  women  [17].  UPs’  age  range  was  23-80,  mean 
age  51.  Their  symptoms  varied  from  mild  (voiding 
just  outside  the  normal  parameters,  mild 
frequency 
urgency,  and  no  leakages)  to  severe  (increased  number  of 
voids,  high  urgency,  and  leakages).  Most  UPs  (8/9)  were 
confident in using a smartphone. Each interview lasted two 
hours and was divided into three parts (Table 2). UPs were 
recruited via newsletter and research contacts. 

Table 2. User Participants – Interview Structure. 

Phase 

Content 

Phase 1 Experiences  Open-ended questions. 

Phase 2 Screenshots 

Phase 3 Sketches 

Screenshots illustrating literature 
review concepts. 
UPs’ drawings of possible app 
functionalities. 

The first phase was the same as for the MPs - aimed to gain 
a deeper  understanding of  the condition. However, for  the 
remaining two phases we focused more on getting detailed 
design  ideas,  instead  of  validating  the  proposed  app 
concepts.  Similar  to  Uzor  et  al.  [58],  during  the  second 
phase of the interview, we presented UPs with paper-based 
bladder  diaries,  icons,  and  screenshots  depicting  literature 
review concepts and asked them to provide feedback. In the 
third phase, UPs were asked to design or suggest their own 
version  of  functions  or  to  recommend  new  features.  The 
motivation  behind  this  was  to  encourage  the  more  visual 
participants to engage in the app design [4].  

Before  the  UPs  interviews,  our  MPs  validated  that  our 
interview  plan  was  appropriate.  We  also  wanted  to  make 
sure  that  the  interview  structure  did  not  cause  any 

emotional  distress.  Therefore,  we  used  Baillie  et  al.’s 
emotion  wheel  [5],  an  adapted  version  of  Russel’s  [50],  to 
capture  UPs’  emotions  during  different  phases.  This 
approach has proved successful when investigating players’ 
emotional  reactions  towards  location-based  games  [5]  and 
viewing  and  augmenting  emotional  perception  when 
viewing images [3]. 

3.2.2 Findings. Phase 1: Two  UPs  did  not  consider  seeking 
help  as  they  felt  the  condition  is  not  troublesome.  Only 
three  UPs  had  filled  in  a  bladder  diary  before.  As 
highlighted  by  MPs,  two  had  problems  with  filling  it  in 
completely  due  to  a  busy  lifestyle  or  forgetfulness:  “Yes, I 
kept delaying filling it in because of lack of time. I used to do 
it based on memory. And it's so unpractical on paper.” (UP6). 
Confirming  MP3’s  statement,  most  UPs  (6/9)  restrict  their 
daily fluid intake.  

Phase  2  and  3:  A  contradiction  was  found  between  the 
two  stakeholder  categories  with  respect  to  one  of  the 
functionalities  proposed.  As  opposed  to  nurses’  view 
regarding  the  toilet  map,  all  UPs  agreed  with  the  feature: 
“That would be more than helpful. It would be indispensable 
in  an  area  that  is  completely  unfamiliar  to  me.”  (UP1). 
Regarding 
interest, 
whenever in need of a toilet, UPs tend to go to restaurants 
and  bars  (4/9),  coffee  shops  (3/9)  and  public  toilets  on  the 
street (2/9).  

information/points 

location 

of 

Figure 1: Examples of possible distraction techniques. 

(e.g.,  animals,  states),  countdown 

We  presented  UPs  with  screenshots  depicting  possible 
distraction techniques (Fig. 1). Most UPs (7/9) agreed that a 
game  can  be  a  viable  distraction  technique,  with  complex 
ones,  that  “make  your  brain  work  hard”  (UP4)  being 
preferred.  As  other  distractions,  UPs  mentioned  naming 
objects 
from  100, 
multiplications, or simply visualizing names that pop up on 
a screen. We also asked our UPs where they would play the 
game,  with  home  being  the  preferred  location  (5/9), 
followed by office (2/9) and commuting (1/9).  
All  UPs  agreed  with  the  progress  feature  as  exciting  -  “it 
would stimulate me” (UP2). We  also  discovered  that UPs  are 
more  interested  in  visualizing  their  progress  in  terms  of 
physical rehabilitation and not lifestyle changes. As a goal, 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 703Page 4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UPs  would  mostly  want  to  reduce  their  number  of  voids 
(6/9) and leakages (3/9). UP4 drew the progress feature as a 
bar  chart  [15],  with  both  leakages  and  number  of  voids 
being represented. According to them, the progress should 
be shown daily and differentiate between working days and 
weekends. The number of voids and leakages could also be 
coded by sad/happy  icons (e.g., a day  in  which  the person 
has  an 
leakages/voids  can  be 
categorized as a ‘sad’ day). 

increased  number  of 

view regarding the PFM reminder icon. We presented them 
with various screenshots (Fig. 4), from which Fig. 4 left (4/9) 
and Fig. 4 right (3/9) were the preferred ones by 7/9 UPs. 

A new function was suggested by UP6, as an official permit 
to help people gain quick toilet access in public spaces. The 
motivation  behind  this  is  that  certain  public  spaces  (e.g., 
shops) do not allow non-customer toilet access.  

Figure 2: Fluid intake and voiding drawings made by UPs. 

We also discussed the possibility of having a bladder diary 
and what representations would be best. For the fluid intake 
input, UPs indicated a mug (Fig. 2 left - UP7), whilst for the 
voiding one, a toilet representation (Fig. 2 right - UP4). 

We also discussed the app icon and having security/privacy 
features.  We  presented  UPs  with  various  icons,  some  that 
aimed  not  to  draw  attention  (Fig.  3  left)  and  some  OAB 
related (Fig. 3 right). No major preference was found as four 
UPs would prefer the non-OAB icon and five the OAB one 
as  “you can say it’s a water app.”  (UP6).  However,  5/9  UPs 
would  like  a  security  feature  such  as  a  password  (2)  or 
quick lock (1). UPs’ view varied from “I would most probably 
delete  the  app  if  someone  would  take  my  phone  and  find  it 
there.”  (UP2)  to  “No extra level of protection. Keep it as simple 
as possible.” (UP8). 

Figure 3: Example of icon representations: non-OAB related 
icon (left) and slightly OAB related icon (right). 

All UPs agreed with receiving PFM exercises reminders and 
8/9 would also like an alert reminding them to drink more 
liquids.  As  a  modality  to  receive  reminders,  vibration  was 
chosen by all UPs, followed by sound (4/9) and silent (3/9). 
Confirming one of our initial hypotheses that people might 
perceive  the  app  as  being  embarrassing,  UP1  suggested 
hiding  the  reminder:  “Consider  the  fact that  you  are home 
and you have a visitor.  You wouldn't  like  anything  audio or 
with  sound.”,  with  UP2  adding:  “No  pop-up  notification  – 
What if your phone is in front of someone?”.  In  addition  to 
fluid  intake reminders,  we also wanted to  understand UPs’ 

Figure  4:  Example  of  PFM  exercises  reminder  screenshots: 
PFM related icon (left) and slightly PFM related icon (right). 

Regarding  the  emotion  wheel  feedback,  UPs  mostly 
expressed  positive  emotions  such  as  ‘Relaxed’,  ‘Calm’  and 
‘Happy’.  This  suggests  that  interviews  might  be  a  suitable 
method  for  gathering  requirements  with  participants 
suffering from a sensitive condition. During the third phase, 
we  encountered  11  positive  and  7  negative  emotions.  This 
might  be  because,  although  some  UPs  were  pleased  with 
their  contribution “I like drawing!” (UP4),  some  did not like 
drawing: “I don’t like drawing things.” (UP9). 

3.3  Design Decisions 

Based on the design findings from this study, we developed 
the  first  prototype  on  a  Samsung  Galaxy  S6  smartphone, 
with the following main functions: 

Progress:  Considering  UP4’s  drawing  and  other  UPs’ 
comments,  we  decided  to  design  the  progress  function  by 
means  of  charts,  with  both  happy  and  sad  icons.  Users 
would also have the option of setting up a goal in terms of 
the number of voids they would like to achieve in a day. 

Reminders and Disguise:  As  no  agreement  was  reached, 
we decided to re-visit these features during Study 2.  

Distraction:  We  settled  upon  three  techniques  for 
distraction:  two  games  and  one  non-game  oriented.  The 
first  game  was  Tetris  [21]  (Fig.  5  right)  as  puzzle  games 
increase users’ level of attention [8, 13] and can be an ideal 
distraction  technique.  Tetris  also  proved  successful  when 
dealing  with  Post-Traumatic  Stress  Disorder  as  it  requires 
attention  and  information  processing  [21]  –  which  further 
strengthens 
its  use  as  a  way  of  distraction.  Since 
multiplications were also suggested, we considered that the 
mathematical game 2048 [63] (Fig. 5 left) would be another 
suitable  distraction.  Finally,  as  UPs  also  suggested 
distractions that do not require any interaction and the fact 
that  they  wouldn’t  be  able  to  play  games  all  the  time  at 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 703Page 5 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
work,  we  implemented  the  concept  of  doing  quick  PFM 
contractions as a distraction. 

Figure 5: The two  games  proposed  in the  application:  2048 
(left) and Tetris (right). 

Map:  The  map  feature  is  a  customized  version  of  the 
Google  Maps  application  [24]  that  includes  only  the 
locations  mentioned  by  UPs  during  the  interviews  (e.g., 
restaurants,  bars)  which  might  have  toilets.  The  function 
also provides directions together with duration to reach the 
destination.  

Bladder Diary:  We  decided  to  implement  the  fluid  intake 
representation  as  in  Fig.  2  left.  UP4’s  suggestion  was  to 
design  the  voids  screen  as  a  toilet  (Fig.  2  right).  However, 
we felt as this representation would remind people of their 
condition  and  due  to  privacy  concerns,  we  decided  to  use 
the same design as for the fluid intake screen (e.g., a mug). 
Precise urine quantities are required when filling in paper-
based  bladder  diaries  or  in  existing  OAB  apps  [30,  57], 
forcing people to use a receptacle each time to measure the 
outcome.  Intuitively,  this  becomes  inconvenient  when  in 
public  spaces  or  even  at  home.  We,  therefore,  decided  to 
use approximations to avoid users having to measure urine 
and instead implemented it as clickable images (Fig. 6 left). 
As in the paper-based diary, our representation also records 
when, their urge, and how much they urinated. 

Treatment  Description:  This 
contains  a 
description  of  the  condition  and  its  treatment,  gathered 
from medical leaflets designed for people with OAB.  

feature 

Toilet  Pass:  A  simple  screen  with  text  and  images, 
specifying the person has OAB and needs toilet access.  

4  STUDY 2 – PROTOTYPE INTERVIEWS 
After  the  development  phase,  we  wanted  to  validate  our 
prototype by interviewing again MPs and UPs. Both sets of 
interviews  consisted  of  open-ended  questions;  data  were 
analyzed in the same way as before. 

Figure  6:  Our  voids  representation  (left)  as  opposed  to  the 
paper-based bladder diary (right). 

4.1  Medical Participants  

4.1.1  Methodology.  The  app  complies  with  UK  OAB 
guidelines  and  we  also  confirmed  with  MPs  that  it  is 
suitable for their patients. MPs were presented with the app 
installed  on  a  Samsung  Galaxy  S6  device  and  asked  to 
comment  on  the  features.  In  total  four  semi-structured 
interviews  were  conducted  with  one  medical  consultant 
(MP2) and four urinary continence specialist nurses (MP3 - 
6). MP2 and MP3  took part  in  Study 1 under  the  same MP 
number. MP4 and MP3 were partially interviewed together 
as  MP4  had  to  leave  during  the  interview.  All  interviews 
were conducted face to face and notes were taken down.  

4.1.2 Findings. MPs agreed with the functionalities presented 
and  provided  suggestions  on  how  to  improve  them. 
Regarding  the  progress,  MP2  suggested  providing  only 
happy  icons  as  positive  reinforcement.  Although  the 
information  provided  in  the  treatment  description  was 
chosen  from valid  leaflets, providing  images  and links was 
suggested. In line with the literature stating that OAB is an 
embarrassing  condition  [10],  two  nurses  suggested  to  not 
specify  the name  of the condition  in the  toilet pass due to 
confidentiality  reasons  or  personal  preferences  “People 
might not like that it states it's OAB.” (MP5).  

Contradictions  were  also  found  between  the  feedback 
provided  in  Study  1  and  the  findings  of  this  study.  For 
example,  all  MPs  now  agreed  with  the  map  feature  with 
MP3  stating:  “Depends on the regime, I don't think it's a bad 
feature.”,  whilst  MP4  mentioned:  “I  understand  the 
contradiction as the map can increase the perception of going 
to  the  toilet.  However,  I  agree  with  the  feature  as  it  reduces 
anxiety  -  it  provides  reassurance  and  helps  people  adjust  to 
the  regime  better.”.  Another  contradiction  found  was 
regarding the bladder diary. Whilst two nurses emphasized 
the  fact  that precise  urine quantities  are needed otherwise 
the  diary  would  be  meaningless,  MP2  agreed  with  using 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 703Page 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
approximations  as  “Measuring  urine  is  not  easy  and  this 
would increase compliance.”.  

3  right)  as  “it's descriptive but doesn't offer  too much info.” 
(UP10).  

4.2  User Participants  

4.2.1 Methodology. As  with  the  MPs  interviews,  UPs  were 
presented  with  the  updated  app  and  asked  to  provide 
feedback.  In  addition,  they  were  presented  with  possible 
embarrassing  situations  and  asked  if  they  might  want  the 
app to be discreet. We interviewed six people (UP9-14) with 
OAB  symptoms  of  various  ranges,  five  females  and  one 
male, age range 35 - 73, mean age 54.6. UP9 also  took part 
in  Study  1.  All  UPs  either  agreed  or  strongly  agreed  that 
they  are  confident  using  a  smartphone.  With  respect  to 
OAB  apps,  only  one  UP  is  using  the  Squeezy  [55]  app  for 
PFM  exercises.  Only  one  interview  was  conducted  face  to 
face and all others via Skype. Among the online interviews, 
three UPs were presented with app screenshots as they did 
not  own  an  Android  OS  device.  As  the  purpose  of  this 
interview  was to collect qualitative data regarding  the app 
design,  we  felt  that  presenting  the  prototype  in  various 
ways  did  not  influence  UP’s  view.  We  recruited  UPs  via 
contact provided in an online bladder diary questionnaire. 

4.2.2  Findings.  All  UPs  agreed  with  the  functionalities 
implemented.  Several  improvements  were  suggested  such 
as  displaying  only  one  location  at  a  time  on  the  map 
“because  sometimes  the  icons  are  too  close  to  each  other” 
(UP13) or to revise the urine quantity representation in the 
bladder  diary.  In  line  with  the  MPs’  comments,  two  UPs 
suggested  improving  the  treatment  description  with  more 
information  on  the  PFM  topic.  UPs  would  mostly  play  the 
games at home (5/6), followed by on the bus (3/6) and work 
(1/6). Nearly all UPs (5/6) mentioned the same locations for 
both games. Candy Crush [12] and Solitaire [54] were other 
games suggested. Some of the other distraction techniques, 
e.g., countdown from 100 and naming objects did not meet 
with  much  approval  with  half  or  less  saying  these  were 
suitable. As for the MPs’ feedback regarding the toilet pass, 
two  UPs  suggested  changing  the  OAB  terminology  to 
“sensitive  bladder”  (UP11)  because  “OAB  symptoms  seems 
like a medical term.” (UP15). 

The progress icons generated mixed feedback with one UP 
stating:  “The sad face shows you’ve failed but it might not be 
the case. For example, for me, the urge is worse when it’s cold 
outside and it’s not my fault.”  (UP10).  Regarding  the  privacy 
aspect, only UP10 asked for a password to open the app. All 
other UPs suggested avoiding this functionality as: “It would 
only  overcomplicate  things”  (UP11),  “It's  not  that  sensitive 
info, it's not a major priority”  (UP13),  and,  “It would be too 
complicated  and  if  I  have  the  urge  an  extra  layer  would 
annoy me.” (UP14). All UPs voted for the same app icon (Fig. 

Although  all  UPs  agreed  that  it  would  be  useful  having  a 
PFM  exercises  reminder,  no  agreement  was  achieved 
regarding  the  modalities  by  which  to  send  the  reminder, 
when  to  send  it  or  its  icon.  Whilst  two  UPs  did  not  want 
any icon, two preferred Fig. 4 left and two Fig. 4 right.  

Contradicting  the  literature  review  and  Study  1  findings 
regarding  embarrassment  and  stigma,  no  ideas  for  making 
the  design  more  discreet  were  generated  or  asked  for  by 
UPs during this study. 

4.3  Design Decisions 

We  took  on  board  the  new  suggestions  and  decided  to 
implement several changes. Firstly, with respect to the map, 
we  settled  upon  displaying  only  one  location  at  a  time, 
giving the option to users to see additional toilet locations if 
they  wished.  Secondly,  the  progress  was  changed  to  only 
show positive icons, which are generated based on the goal 
(Fig. 7). We decided to represent the first three days of the 
progress based on the data entered into the diary (as this is 
a common practice in the UK [20]). However, as people fail 
to  fill  in  diaries,  we  felt  it  would  be  appropriate  to 
automatically calculate the progress for the remaining days 
according  to  distraction  techniques  usage  and  other 
notifications  sent  by  the  app.  Thirdly,  small  changes  were 
made  in  the  bladder  diary  function  regarding  the  urine 
quantities.  Fourthly,  the  text  in  the  toilet pass function  was 
changed based on recommendations. 

Figure 7: Original (left) and New (right) Progress Chart. 

Lastly,  we  changed  some  information  in  the  treatment 
description  provided  and  added  two  videos.  The  only 
function  remaining  the  same  is  the  games  as  no  changes 
were suggested. No privacy feature was implemented as no 
agreement  could  be  reached  during  Study  1  and  only  one 
UP  wished  one  in  Study  2.  Finally,  we  settled  upon  Fig.  3 
right  as  the  app’s  icon,  Fig.  4  right  as  the  PFM  exercises 
reminder  icon  and  letting  users  decide  by  which  modality 
they wish to receive a reminder. 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 703Page 7 
 
 
 
 
5  STUDY 3 – SHORT FIELD STUDY 
Kjeldskov  and  Skov  [47]  and  Baillie  and  Schatz  [6] 
underline  the  importance  of  conducting  short  in  situ 
evaluations  as  lab-based  ones  could  leave  usability  or  UX 
issues  unrevealed. We, therefore, evaluated the  app  during 
a  short  field  study  with  UPs.  When  evaluating  an  app  for 
older  adults  with  age-related  macular  degeneration, 
Hakobyan  et  al.  [26]  conducted  a  preliminary  7  days 
evaluation  study  before  carrying  on  with  a  6  weeks 
longitudinal  field  one.  Previous  sensor  research  [34,  39] 
found  differences  between  weekdays  and  weekends  and 
recommend undertaking a study which lasts at least a week 
(best  9-11  days)  and  collects  both  weekday  and  weekend 
data. Given this, we ran the study for 9 days. 

5.1  Methodology 
The  study  was  divided  into  three  phases  (Table  3)  and 
aimed to discover app usability issues, collect sensor data to 
understand  how  people  interact  with  the  app  in  the  field, 
and  understand  if  users’  design  decisions  from  previous 
studies hold when using the app in a real-life context. 

Table 3. User Participants – Study 3 Structure. 

Phase 
Phase 1 Set Up  

Phase 2 Field 
Study 
Phase 3 
Uninstallation 

Content 
App installation and usability 
evaluation. 
Nine days uncontrolled field study. 

App uninstallation and usability 
evaluation. 

We started by posting invitations on social media and flyers 
around  universities,  libraries  and  leisure  centers.  We  also 
emailed prostate cancer support groups. As people were not 
coming  forward,  we  also  advertised  the  study  over  the 
radio.  We  recruited  six  UPs  (UP15-20),  three  males  and 
three females, age range 26 – 66, mean age 54.6. Most UPs 
(5/6) agreed or strongly agreed they were confident using a 
smartphone. No UP was aware of other OAB apps. 
The  first  phase  was  a  face  to  face  or  Skype  interview  in 
which  the  app  was  installed  on  UPs’  phone.  After 
installation,  UPs  were  asked  to  interact  with  the  app  by 
conducting  tasks  related  to  the  features  (e.g.,  set  up  the 
desired  preferences,  input  data  into  the  diary  and  inspect 
the  map).  After  each  task,  UPs  evaluated  the  workload 
using  the  standard  NASA-TLX  questionnaire  [42,  27].  We 
provided  UPs  with  tasks  and  NASA-TLX  questionnaire  as 
we  wanted  to evaluate  the  app  and  the  mental  load of  the 

games  (since  we  were  using  them  as  a  suppression 
technique).  This  measure  has  proved  successful  when 
evaluating other mHealth apps [28, 38]. Again, we used the 
emotion  wheel  by  Baillie  et  al.  [5]  to  capture  players’ 
emotions  regarding  the  games.  We  administered  a  wheel 
before  playing  the  game  to  capture  their  initial  emotions 
and  a  second one after to understand whether  this type of 
distraction had an emotional impact on users. 

The  second  phase  was  a  9  days  field  study  in  which  UPs 
interacted with the app  freely  in the field. As  suggested  in 
[39],  we  collected  sound,  light  and  magnetic  field  data  to 
capture  environment  data,  WIFI  (connected  and  visible 
hotspots name) to determine location and accelerometer to 
determine  motion.  Additionally,  we  collected  app  log  data 
(number of accesses per feature and duration) from all UPs. 
We collected the environment and other data as we wished 
to  investigate  how  an  algorithm  could  be  used  to  improve 
app functions such as distraction techniques durations and 
frequency  of  reminders.  Data  were  automatically  collected 
and uploaded to a server. No personal information such as 
photos, messages, and contacts was accessed or collected.  

After the field study, UPs were asked to participate again in 
a  short  interview  (Phase  3).  As  we  wanted  to  determine 
whether using the app in the field has an impact on the way 
users  perceive  it,  the  same  procedure  as  in  the  first  phase 
was  applied.  Additionally,  UPs  were  asked  to  fill  in  a  SUS 
questionnaire 
[9]  and  answer  additional  questions, 
composed of 5-point Likert scales. These data were needed 
to understand whether the app was usable, if the UPs were 
satisfied  with  the  features  and  if  they  would  recommend 
the  app  to  other  people  with  OAB.  At  the  end  of  the 
interview, the app was uninstalled from their phone. Apart 
from  UP16  who  owned  a  Huawei  device,  all  other  UPs 
owned a  Samsung Galaxy smartphone, same  as  the  device 
used  for  development.  Full  data  (including  sensor  data) 
were  collected  from  UP15,  UP17,  UP18,  and  UP19.  Due  to 
technical  issues,  only  interview  and  app  interaction  usage 
data were collected from UP16 and UP20. 

5.2  Findings 

Although  evaluated  by  only  six  UPs,  the  85.8  SUS  score 
indicates that the app usability can be classified as excellent 
[7].  This  is  also  reflected  in  the  fact  that  all  UPs  would 
recommend the app to other OAB people and all would like 
to be informed when the new app version is available. UP20 
emphasized  the  benefits  of  using  the  app:  “The more I used 
the  application,  the  better.  I  feel  more  relaxed  about  it.  It 
helped  me  to  take  more  control.  I'm  going  to  the  toilet  less, 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 703Page 8 
 
Distraction 

UP 

Location 

Movement 

Environment 

2048 

Tetris 

Quick 
Contraction
s 

UP15 

UP17 

UP18 

UP19 

UP20 

UP15 

UP17 

UP18 

UP19 

UP20 

UP15 

UP17 

UP18 

UP19 

UP20 

Home, 
Travelling 

Still, On Foot 

- 

Home 

Home 

- 

- 

Still 

Still 

- 

Home, 
Travelling 

On foot, In 
Vehicle 

Quiet/Loud, 
Dark/Bright 

- 

Quiet, Dark 

Quiet, Dark/Bright 

- 

Quiet, Dark/Bright 

Home 

Home 

Home 

- 

Home 

Home 

- 

Home 

- 

Still 

Still 

Still 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

Quiet, Bright 

Quiet, Dark 

Quiet, Bright 

- 

Quiet, Bright 

Quiet, Bright 

- 

Quiet, Bright 

- 

Total 
No. 
Days 

Total No. 
Accesses 

1 

1 

8 

3 

2 

4 

3 

8 

3 

7 

1 

1 

3 

1 

6 

4 

3 

33 

4 

4 

5 

3 

22 

3 

16 

1 

1 

6 

1 

15 

Duration  

1 – 8 mins 

1 min 

5 – 41 mins 

3 – 10 mins 

3 secs - 18 mins 

7 secs - 16 mins 

2 mins 

16 secs - 47 mins 

2 – 3 mins 

1 secs - 22 mins 

12 secs 

8 secs 

0 - 23 secs 

12 secs 

1 secs - 2 mins 

Figure 9. Users’ engagement with the distraction techniques.

am  less  anxious.  I  managed  to  drop  2  runs  to  the  toilet  per 
day.  It  helped  me  make  a  routine  of  avoiding  going  to  the 
toilet, especially by doing the PFM exercises.” 

Progress:  UPs  mostly  checked  their  progress  at  home, 
during  the  first  three  days  and  after  entering  voiding  data 
into the diary. This could reflect the fact that people like to 
visualize  their  progress.  The  number  of  instances  for 
checking  their  progress  decreased  significantly  after  the 
first  three  days  in  which  they  were  asked  to  fill  in  the 
bladder diary (Fig. 8). This might mean that UPs questioned 
or  did  not  understand  the  accuracy  of  the  automatically 
calculated progress or perhaps more interaction is required 
to keep them motivated.  

Figure  8:  Total  number  of  accesses  per  day  regarding  the 
progress feature over the course of the study.  

UPs  perceived  the  overall  workload  between  0%-5%, 
indicating  that  reading  the  progress  chart  was  easy  to  do. 
Most  UPs  (4/6)  were  satisfied  with  the  feature  and  5/6 
strongly  agreed  or  agreed  that  seeing  their  progress  was 
motivational. Regarding setting up a goal, all UPs strongly 
agreed or agreed it was motivational. Half UPs managed to 
achieve  their  goal,  from  whom  two  strongly  agreed  that 
seeing the happy icons in the progress was motivational: “It 
made me aware that I made my target.” (UP17).  

Reminders: According  to  their preferred settings, 5/6 UPs 
consider the PFM reminder as being important and did not 
have an issue with the notification being displayed on their 
screen  when  the  phone  is  locked.  This  finding  contradicts 
the  discreetness  suggestions  provided  in  Study  1.  As 
previously  found  [38,  14],  4/6  UPs  stated  the  reminders 
helped in adhering to their exercise and fluid intake regime: 
“Think it is a good feature, it was helpful.”  (UP20),  “The whole 
app made me aware of the exercises and the fluids.”  (UP17). 
Only  two  UPs  are  not  drinking  the  right  amount  of  fluids 
per  day  and  received  the  reminder.  Among  them,  one 
mentioned it helped them drink a proper amount of fluids. 

Distractions: All UPs  agree or strongly agree when asked 
if  they  are  satisfied  with  the  games:  “Now I found  I  can 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 703Page 9 
 
 
distract myself-not totally, but I can take my mind out of the 
urge  and  go  continue  with  other  things.”  (UP18).  The 
complexity of the games played an important role, as UP20 
commented  about  the  game  2048:  “I get totally caught into 
this.  I  find  it  very  absorbing.”  and  added,  “Your  games  are 
complicated which is good on one hand.”  

Most  UPs  perceived  the  mental  workload  on  the  NASA-
TLX as being high (70%-90%) and showed an increased level 
of  Frustration  (e.g.,  90%):  “It's not easy. I enjoyed playing this 
one  but  it's  again  frustrating.”  (UP19  regarding  2048).  For 
Tetris,  the  temporal  demand  and  the  level  of  effort  were 
marked with a workload between 20%-100%.  

The emotion wheels  provided before  and after playing  the 
games show a change in emotions in 2/6 UPs (from Amused 
and  Happy  to  Frustrated).  Contradictions  were  also  found 
between  the  feedback  provided.  UP19  felt  approximately 
30%-35% Frustrated but selected positive emotions (Relaxed 
and  Amused)  in  the  emotion  wheel  after  playing  2048. 
UP18’s  emotions 
in 
contradiction with feeling 25%-30% Frustrated after playing 
Tetris.  As games (especially  Tetris)  might cause  anxiety  in 
its  players  [13],  we  asked  our  UPs  whether  they 
encountered similar experiences. No UP mentioned that the 
games caused anxiety while playing. Although the feedback 
collected  in  the  emotion  wheels  and  the  NASA-TLX 
questionnaire  show  some  emotion  changes,  none  of  them 
relates to anxiety.  

(Satisfied  and  Amused)  are 

UPs’ engagement with the games varies as some (e.g., UP18) 
played  multiple  times  per  day  in  8/9  days  of  the  study, 
whilst  others  (e.g.,  UP20  and  UP19)  played  for  two-three 
days. Location is also an important factor as all UPs mostly 
played  the games  at home. This is  strengthened by UP19’s 
comment  that  “Games helped me. But they do not work when 
I am out and about and walking.” and  UP20  who  is  “More 
confident in using the distractions when at home or at work.”. 
Fig.  9  shows  how  each  UP  interacted  with  the  distraction 
techniques during the study (UP16 only played Tetris once 
for 6 minutes). 

Regarding  the  quick  PFM  contractions,  UPs  evaluated  the 
overall  workload  between  0%-5%,  indicating  that  reading 
the  instructions  is  easy.  This  distraction  met  with  higher 
approval  among  female  UPs  (2/3):  “The most successful in 
terms  of,  let's  say  discreet  and  less  time  required.  It's  quite 
efficient for me.” (UP20). 

Map:  UPs  evaluated  the  overall  workload  of  interacting 
with  the  feature  to  be  low  on  all  NASA-TLX  scales 
(between  0%-10%).  Contrary  to  our  expectations,  UPs  did 
not use the feature at all during the field study. One reason 
for this might be the fact that UPs used the app for a short 

period  of  time  in  known  locations  and  did  not  find 
themselves  in  a  situation  where  they  needed  to  use  the 
map. Although nurses declared in Study 1 that a toilet map 
would  stop people  from  adhering  to  treatment  as  it would 
facilitate toilet access, the feature is perceived as providing 
assurance:  “Like  to  know  in  the  back  of  my  head  there  is  a 
toilet.”  (UP20).  So  contrary  to  our  original  thoughts,  the 
main function  of the  map could be reassurance,  indicating 
that lack of interaction does not mean lack of user need for 
the function.  

Bladder Diary:  All  UPs  evaluated  the  overall  NASA-TLX 
workload  to  be  0%-5%,  indicating  that  inputting  data  is 
trivial.  This  is  validated  by  the  fact  that  all  UPs  strongly 
disagreed  that  inserting  data  was  difficult.  The  following 
comment validates the literature [61] and Study 1-Findings 
and explains why UPs mostly inserted data when at home: 
“I strongly agree it's difficult remembering to input data. I did 
best on my routine days but during weekends it’s different. It's 
hard to remember to record something that is natural and not 
a big event.” (UP20). 

Most  UPs  (4/6)  filled  in  the  diary  only  for  the  three 
requested  days,  although  some  did  it  for  more  days.  For 
most UPs, the accuracy of the data inserted is questionable 
as  the  timings  for  inputting  fluid  and  void  data  coincide. 
This  is  also  reflected  in  the  fact  that  UPs  mostly  inputted 
the data at home, which means it was not in real time. We 
wanted to make filling in the diary as easy as possible and 
decided  to  automatically  save  the  time  when  users  input 
data. However, our  findings  show  that UPs would actually 
like  altering  the  timings:  “The possibility of altering the time 
for  the  bladder  diary  as  it's  not  always  possible  to  record 
things  straight  away.  I  used  to  do  a  mental  record  and  then 
fill it in.”  (UP16).  This  might  also  be  the  reason  why  the 
timings  for  inputting  fluid  intake  and  void  data  coincide. 
Regarding  approximating  the  urine  quantity,  4/6  UPs 
strongly disagreed or disagreed it is difficult to do.  

found  the 

Treatment Description: All  UPs  evaluated  the  workload 
between  0%-5%.  All  UPs  strongly  agree  or  agree  with  the 
feature  and 
information  provided  useful. 
Although it has been suggested to include videos, only one 
male  UP  watched  the  two  available  videos.  UP17,  already 
familiar  with  the  exercises  declared  “I  didn't  watch  the 
videos as I am already doing them. Maybe to refresh but after 
3 years I think I'm doing them right.”. 

Toilet  Pass:  Half  of  the  UPs  strongly  agree  with  it. 
Although it has been accessed multiple times, no UP used it 
in  unknown  places:  “It might be useful. I have a card in my 
wallet, but I would use that one first.” (UP16). 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 703Page 10 
 
6  DISCUSSION 
In  this  section,  we  discuss  the  outcomes  from  the  three 
studies and how they address our research questions. 

RQ1:  What key features should an OAB mHealth app have to 
support people during self-managed treatment? 

Progress:  We  wanted  to  understand  whether  we  should 
allow  users  to  set  goals,  show  their  progress  and  provide 
positive  feedback  when  the  goal  is  reached.  Although  the 
progress  feature  was  met  with  high  approval  during  the 
first two studies, we obtained mixed results during the field 
study.  For  the  first  three  days,  the  progress  was  displayed 
based  on  the  data  inputted  in  the  bladder  diary.  In  the 
following six days, it was automatically calculated based on 
distraction techniques usage and other notifications sent by 
the app. In comparison to the first three days, we found that 
in  this part of  the  study (in which no  user interaction was 
needed)  the  progress  checking  dropped  significantly.  This 
seems  to  suggest  that  either  UPs  did  not  understand  how 
the  app  was  automatically  calculating  progress  or  that  a 
minimal  level of  interaction  is required,  such as filling out 
the bladder diary daily in order to keep users motivated in 
tracking  their  progress.    In  our  next  app  version,  we  will 
ask  users  to  keep  on  entering  data  into  the  diary  (as  the 
findings  showed  this  was  quick  to  do  and  required  low 
workload). 

Reminders:  Performing  daily  PFM  exercises 
is  an 
important  part  of  the  bladder  retraining  regime  as  well  as 
drinking  a  proper  amount  of  fluids  per  day.  Our  results 
show  that  reminders  help  people  with  their  PFM  exercise 
regime and in promoting a healthier lifestyle.  

to 

implement  distraction 
Distraction:  We  wanted 
techniques from going to the toilet when there is an urge to 
urinate.  Mobile  phone  games  have  proved  successful  in 
promoting healthier lifestyles such as teaching people how 
to make healthier meal choices [25] or  motivating them to 
have  a  healthy  water  intake  [14].  On  the  other  hand, 
interactive  games  did  not  prove  successful  in  helping 
people  quit  smoking  [46].  Given  UPs’  comments  and 
interactions  during  the  field  study,  our  results  tally  with 
[25]  and  indicate  that  games  could  be  a  successful 
distraction  technique,  if  users  find  it  engaging.  Given  the 
high  perceived  workload  in  the  Mental  Demand  scale 
the  NASA-TLX,  playing  mentally 
measured  using 
demanding  games  could  also  be  a  successful  urge 
suppression  technique.  The  NASA-TLX  also  showed  that 
there  was  a  high  level  of  frustration  after  playing  the 
games.  However,  the  emotion  wheel  results  indicate  that 
users  were  amused  and  satisfied.  This  could  suggest  that 
designers  should  not  rely  only  on  the  NASA-TLX 

questionnaire  if  they  want  to  have  a  full  picture  of  users’ 
feelings towards a certain interaction.   

Embarrassment: We wanted to know if the app needed to 
be disguised or have additional access permissions because 
of  potential  embarrassment  concerns.  Contradicting 
literature  findings,  our  results  show  that  embarrassment 
was not a major factor for our UPs. Whilst discreetness and 
increased privacy ideas were suggested during Study 1, UPs 
in  Study  2  said  that  an  additional  level  of  security  could 
over complicate things, causing annoyance when quick app 
access  is  needed.  It  is  therefore  clear  there  may  be 
competing  demands  when  it  comes  to  an  OAB  app  e.g., 
security could be an impediment to quick access.   

Location: We  investigated the possibility of having a map 
displaying  the nearest points of  interest that  might have  a 
toilet. Although contradictions were found between the two 
stakeholder  categories,  UPs  emphasized  the  importance  of 
having  such  a  feature  and  therefore,  we  decided  to 
implement it. Although UPs did not interact with it during 
the  field  study,  we  found  that  they  said  that  it  provided 
reassurance.  We  would  like  to  dig  deeper  into  this 
interesting  aspect  for  design  and  re-evaluate  the  feature 
during a longitudinal field study.  

Bladder Diary:  A  bladder  diary  is  a  form  of  assessment. 
During  the field  study, UPs  tended  to check their progress 
immediately  after  entering  data  in  the  diary.  This  might 
indicate that people like to track their symptoms. Therefore, 
we  think  that  providing  users  with  a  direct  interaction 
process  that  then  is  reflected  in  their  progress  may  be 
important 
that  graphical 
representations of the assessment data should be provided. 

for  a  mHealth  app  and 

RQ2:  How might an OAB app help people self-manage their 
treatment and raise awareness of symptoms?   

One  way  of  increasing  adherence  is  by  showing  progress, 
providing  reminders  and  allowing  users  to  set  goals  [45, 
38]. Our results show that these findings could also hold for 
embarrassing conditions. Previous research [45, 37] showed 
the  importance  of  progress  and  positive  feedback,  such  as 
scores  or  badges  to  help  people  adhere  to  treatment. 
However, although linked, the two are usually displayed on 
separate  screens.  Our  results  show  that  combining  happy 
icons  (the  user  reached  their  voids  goal)  and  displaying 
them directly  within  the progress  screen (number  of  voids 
in the past week) motivates people. Therefore, mHealth app 
designers could consider bringing together the progress and 
the goals onto the same screen.  

Confirming  other  literature  findings  [38,  14],  our  data 
showed  that reminders helped  our UPs  with their exercise 
regime and in consuming proper amount of liquid per day. 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 703Page 11 
 
 
 
Although  in  previous  research  reminders  were  focusing 
only  in  one  area  (e.g.,  exercise  adherence  [38],  or  lifestyle 
changes  [14]),  we  show  that  having  more  than  one 
reminder type is not annoying and could encourage people 
with  their  self-managed  treatment.  Therefore,  designers 
may consider using more than one reminder type.  

During  Study  1,  it  was  suggested  to  us  to  include  a 
treatment  outline.  This  feature  met  with  high  approval 
during  Study  2  and  had  a  high  number  of  accesses  during 
Study  3.  Moreover,  given  the  fact  that  UPs  stated  the  app 
made them more aware of their exercises and fluid intake, it 
can  be  concluded  that  the  app  also  has  the  potential  of 
increasing awareness of OAB symptoms. 

RQ3:  Does context have an impact on how users engage with 
the app? 

As  suggested  in  the  literature  [6,  47],  both  lab  and  field 
studies  are  needed  to  properly  evaluate  the  usability  of  a 
mobile  phone  app.  Our  data  validate  this  finding  as  we 
discovered  design  issues  with  some  features  (e.g.,  bladder 
diary,  location  map,  and  games)  that  were  not  highlighted 
during  the  first  two  studies.  Our  results  also  show  that 
context  plays  an  important  role  in  the  app  interaction  as 
our UPs mostly interacted with it at home. There are only a 
few  instances  where  people  used  the  app  in  different 
locations, such as being in a vehicle. This can reflect the fact 
that people would mostly use the app in a comfortable but 
also safe environment. 

7  LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
One limitation of our work is the low number of UPs in our 
field  study.  Despite  using  all  the  usual  routes  and  OAB 
association  websites,  we  encountered  major  recruitment 
issues. As we are planning in our next studies to make the 
app  freely  available  for  download,  we  hope  to  achieve 
higher numbers. Our next step is to conduct a longer-term 
field study to evaluate if the app can increase adherence to 
self-managed treatment and raise awareness of symptoms.  

8  CONCLUSION 
This paper  presents  an  exploratory study  in  which  we  co-
designed  and  then  evaluated  with  people  with  OAB  and 
health professionals an OAB mHealth app. We commenced 
with an  OAB and  mHealth  app literature review and  used 
this as the basis for our requirements gathering interviews. 
Based on the data collected we designed the first prototype 
and validated it again with the same stakeholder categories. 
Given  the  second  round  of  feedback,  we  improved  the 
design of the app and evaluated it in a field study for nine 
days with people with OAB.  

Our  findings  show  that,  visualizing  progress  and  setting 
goals  can  be  viewed  on  the  same  screen  and  could 
encourage  people  to  continue  using  the  app.  Regarding 
reminders, having more than one type of reminder does not 
increase annoyance and could encourage adherence to self-
managed  treatment.  Regarding  games,  users  found  them 
engaging and useful in their goal of suppressing the urge to 
visit  the  bathroom.  We  found  that  designers  may  want  to 
consider using more than one technique when assessing the 
success  of  a  game  and  its  emotional  impact  on  users. 
Contrary  to  the  current  research  direction,  we  discovered 
that automatically calculating progress may be a detriment 
to  app  interaction.  We  found  that  an  OAB  mobile  phone 
app  has  the  potential  to  increase  observance  to  self-
managed treatment and raise awareness of symptoms.  

REFERENCES 
[1]   Association  of  Reproductive  Health  Professionals.  2011.  Diagnosis 

and Management of Overactive Bladder. 

[2]   Mobolaji Ayoade and Lynne Baillie. 2014. A novel knee rehabilitation 

system for the home. In Proc CHI '14.  

[3]   Moses Akazue, Martin Halvey and Lynne Baillie. 2017. Using thermal 
stimuli  to  influence  affect  in  different  picture  display  sizes. Personal 
and Ubiquitous Computing. 

[4]   Lynne Baillie. 2002. The home workshop: a method for investigating 

the home. Ph.D. Dissertation. Edinburgh Napier University. 

[5]   Lynne Baillie, Lee Morton, David C. Moffat and Stephen Uzor. 2011. 
Capturing the response of players to a location-based game. Personal 
and Ubiquitous Computing 15.1. 

[6]   Lynne Baillie and Raimund Schatz. 2005. Exploring multimodality in 
the laboratory and  the  field.  In Proceedings of  the  7th international 
conference on Multimodal interfaces. 

[7]   Aaron  Bangor,  Philip  T.  Kortum  and  James  T.  Miller.  2008.  An 
Empirical  Evaluation  of  the  System  Usability  Scale.  International 
Journal  of  Human-Computer 
(6):  574–594. 
doi:10.1080/10447310802205776 

Interaction.  24 

[8]   Walter  R.  Boot, Arthur  F.  Kramer, Daniel  J.  Simons, Monica  Fabiani 
and Gabriele  Gratton.  2008.  The  effects  of  video  game  playing  on 
attention,  memory,  and  executive  control.  Acta  psychologica 129.3: 
387-398. 

[9]   John Brooke. 1996. SUS -  A Quick and Dirty Usability Scale. Usability 

evaluation in industry, 189(194), pp.4–7. 

[10]   Kathryn L. Burgio, Patricia S. Goode, Julie L. Locher, Mary G. Umlauf, 
David  L.  Roth,  Holly  E.  Richter,  Edward  Varner  and  Keith  Lloyd. 
2002.  Behavioural  Training  With  and  Without  Biofeedback  in  the 
Treatment  of  Urge  Incontinence  in  Older  Women:  A  Randomized 
Controlled Trial. Journal of the American Medical Association 
[11]  Michelle  N.  Burns,  Mark  Begale,  Jennifer  Duffecy,  Darren  Gergle, 
Chris J. Karr, Emily Giangrande and David C. Mohr. 2011. Harnessing 
for 
context 
depression. Journal of medical Internet research, 13(3). 

intervention 

a  mobile 

develop 

sensing 

to 

[12]   Candy Crush, https://candycrushsaga.com/en/ 
[13]  Guillaume  Chanel,  Cyril  Rebetez,  Mireille  Bétrancourt  and  Thierry 
Pun.  2008.  Boredom,  engagement  and  anxiety  as  indicators  for 
adaptation  to  difficulty  in  games.  In Proceedings  of  the  12th 
international  conference  on  Entertainment  and  media 
in  the 
ubiquitous era. ACM. 

[14]   Meng-Chieh Chiu, Shih-Ping Chang, Yu-Chen Chang, Hao-Hua Chu, 
Cheryl Chia-Hui Chen, Fei-Hsiu Hsiao and Ju-Chun Ko. 2009. Playful 
bottle:  a  mobile social  persuasion system  to  motivate  healthy water 
international  conference  on 
intake. Proceedings  of 
Ubiquitous computing.  

the  11th 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 703Page 12 
 
[15]   Eun  Kyoung  Choe,  Nicole  B.  Lee,  Bongshin  Lee,  Wanda  Pratt  and 
Julie  A.  Kientz.  2014.  Understanding  quantified-selfers'  practices  in 
collecting  and  exploring  personal  data. Proceedings  of  the  32nd 
annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems.  

[16]   Sebastian  Deterding,  Andrés  Lucero,  Chulhong  Min,  Adrian  Cheok, 
Annika  Waern  and  Steffen  Walz.  2015.  Embarrassing  interactions. 
In Proceedings  of  the  33rd  Annual  ACM  Conference  Extended 
Abstracts  on  Human Factors  in  Computing Systems (pp.  2365-2368). 
ACM. 

[17]   Julie A. Couture and Luc Valiquette. 2000. Urinary Incontinence. The 

Annals of Pharmacotherapy. 

[18]   Karin  S.  Coyne,  Alan  Wein,  Sean  Nicholson,  Marion  Kvasz,Chieh-I 
Chen  and  Ian  Milsom.  2014.  Economic  burden  of  urgency  urinary 
incontinence  in  the  United  States:  a  systematic  review. Journal  of 
Managed Care Pharmacy. 

[19]   Graham  Dove,  Kim  Halskov,  Jodi  Forlizzi  and  John  Zimmerman. 
2017.  UX  Design  Innovation:  Challenges  for  Working  with  Machine 
Learning  as  a  Design  Material.  In Proceedings  of  the  2017  CHI 
Conference on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems (pp.  278-288). 
ACM. 

[20]  European  Association  of  Urology,  International  Consultation  on 

Urological Diseases. 2013. Incontinence. 

[21]   Final  Blog  Post:  TETRIS  and  Other  Videogames’  Effects  on PTSD. 
March 2013. https://chcgamestudies.wordpress.com/2013/03/18/2973/ 
[22]  Eva  Geurts,  Mieke  Haesen,  Paul  Dendale,  Kris  Luyten  and  Karin 
Coninx. 2016. Back on bike: the BoB mobile cycling app for secondary 
prevention  in  cardiac  patients. Proceedings of  the  18th International 
Conference  on  Human-Computer  Interaction  with  Mobile  Devices 
and Services. 

[23]   Barney  G.  Glaser  and  Anselm  L.  Strauss.  1967.  The  discovery  of 
Grounded  Theory:  Strategies  for  Qualitative  Research.  Transaction 
Publishers. 

[24]   Google Maps, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Maps? 
[25]   Andrea  Grimes,  Vasudhara  Kantroo  and  Rebecca  E.  Grinter.  2010. 
Let’s  play!:  mobile  health  games  for adults.  Proceedings  of  the  12th 
ACM international conference on Ubiquitous computing, Pages 241-
250. 

[26]   Lilit Hakobyan, Jo  Lumsden,  Rachel Shaw   and  Dympna  O'Sullivan. 
2016.  A  longitudinal evaluation  of  the  acceptability  and impact of  a 
for  older  adults  with  age-related  macular 
diet  diary  app 
degeneration.   Proceedings  of  the  18th  International  Conference  on 
Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services. 
[27]   Sandra G.  Hart.  2006.  NASA-task  load  index (NASA-TLX);  20  years 
later.  In Proceedings  of  the  human  factors  and  ergonomics  society 
annual meeting (Vol.  50,  No.  9,  pp.  904-908).  Sage  CA:  Los  Angeles, 
CA: Sage Publications. 

[28]   Richard  Harte,  Leo  R  Quinlan,  Liam  Glynn,  Alejandro  Rodríguez-
Molinero,  Paul  MA  Baker,Thomas  Scharf and Gearóid  ÓLaighin. 
2017.  Human-centered  design  study:  enhancing  the  usability  of  a 
mobile phone app in an integrated falls risk detection system for use 
by older adult users. JMIR mHealth and uHealth.  

[29]  Jennifer  Healey,  Pete  Denman,  Haroon  Syed,  Lama  Nachman  and 
Susanna  Raj.  2018.  Circles  vs.  scales:  an  empirical  evaluation  of 
emotional assessment GUIs for mobile phones. In Proceedings of the 
20th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with 
Mobile Devices and Services (p. 12). ACM. 

[30]   iP  Voiding  Diary.  2017.  https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/ip-voiding-

diary/id482034478?mt=8 

[31]   Debra E. Irwin, Zoe S. Kopp, Barnabie Agatep, Ian Milsom and Paul 
Abrams. 2011. Worldwide prevalence estimates of lower urinary tract 
symptoms,  overactive  bladder,  urinary  incontinence  and  bladder 
outlet obstruction. BJU International. 

[32]  Simon  Jackson.  1997.  The  Patient  with  an  overactive  bladder  – 

symptoms and quality-of-life issues. Urology. 

[33] Maia Jacobs, James Clawson and Elizabeth D. Mynatt. 2016. A Cancer 
Journey  Framework:  Guiding  the  Design  of  Holistic  Health 
Int’l  Conf.  Pervasive  Computing 
Technology. Proc.  10th  EAI 
Technologies for Healthcare.  

[34]  Hilmi  Güneş  Kayacik,  Mike  Just,  Lynne  Baillie,  David  Aspinall, 
Nicholas  Micallef.  2014.Data  driven  authentication:  On 
the 
effectiveness  of  user  behaviour  modelling  with  mobile  device 
sensors. In  Proceedings  of  the  Third  Workshop  on  Mobile  Security 
Technologies arXiv:1410.7743. 
Trainer 

[35]  Kegel 

exercises. 

Pelvic 

2017. 

floor 

- 

https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/kegel-trainer-pelvic-
floor/id578148339?mt=8 

[36]  Paul  Lukowicz,  Tnde  Kirstein  and  Gerhard  Troster.  2004.  Wearable 
systems  for  health  care  applications.  Methods  of  information  in 
Medicine. 

[37]  Mark  Matthews,  Stephen  Voida,  Saeed  Abdullah,  Gavin  Doherty, 
Tanzeem  Choudhury,  Sangha  Im  and Geri  Gay.  2015. In situ design 
for  mental  illness:  considering  the  pathology  of  bipolar  disorder  in 
mHealth design. Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services.  
[38]  Nicholas  Micallef,  Lynne  Baillie  and  Stephen  Uzor.  2016.  Time  to 
Exercise!  An  Aide-Memoire  Stroke  App  for  Post-Stroke  Arm 
Rehabilitation. In Proc. ACM MobileHCI. 

[39]   Nicholas Micallef, Mike Just, Lynne Baillie, Martin Halvey and Hilmi 
Güneş  Kayacik.  2015.  Why  aren't  Users  Using  Protection? 
Investigating  the  Usability  of  Smartphone  Locking.  Proceedings  of 
the  17th  International  Conference  on  Human-Computer  Interaction 
with Mobile Devices and Services, Pages 284-294 
and 

behavior. 
1996. Emotions 
Embarrassment: Poise and peril in everyday life. New York, NY, US: 
Guilford Press. 

[40]  Rowland 

S.  Miller. 

social 

[41]  Chulhong  Min,  Saumay  Pushp,  Seungchul  Lee,  Inseok  Hwang, 
Youngki  Lee,  Seungwoo  Kang and Junehwa  Song.  2014.  Uncovering 
embarrassing  moments  in  in-situ  exposure  of  incoming  mobile 
messages.  In Proceedings  of  the  2014  ACM  International  Joint 
Conference  on  Pervasive  and  Ubiquitous  Computing:  Adjunct 
Publication. 

[42]  Hendrik  Müller,  Aaron  Sedley  and  Elizabeth  Ferrall-Nunge.  Survey 
research in HCI. Ways of Knowing in HCI. Springer, New York, NY, 
2014. 229-266. 

[43]  My  pelvic  floor  Fitness.  2016.  http://www.lightsbytena.co.uk/my-

pelvic-floor-fitness/app-info/ 

[44]  Tom  Owen,  Jennifer  Pearson,  Harold  Thimbleby  and  George 
Individual 
Buchanan.  2015.  ConCap:  Designing 
Reflection on Chronic Conditions using Mobile Apps. Proceedings of 
the  17th  International  Conference  on  Human-Computer  Interaction 
with Mobile Devices and Services. 

to  Empower 

[45]  Jeni  Paay,  Jesper  Kjeldskov,  Umachanger  Brinthaparan,  Lars  Lichon, 
Stephan Rasmussen, Nirojan Srikandaraja, Wally Smith, Greg Wadley 
and  Bernd  Ploderer.  2014.  Quitty:  using  technology  to  persuade 
smokers  to  quit.  In Proceedings  of  the  8th  Nordic  Conference  on 
Human-Computer Interaction: Fun, Fast, Foundational. ACM. 

[46]  Bernd  Ploderer,  Wally  Smith,  Jon  Pearce  and  Ron  Borland.  2014.  A 
mobile  app  offering  distractions  and  tips  to  cope  with  cigarette 
craving: a qualitative study. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 2.2. 

[47]   Jesper Kjeldskov and Mikael B. Skov. 2014. Was it worth the hassle?: 
ten  years  of  mobile  HCI  research  discussions  on  lab  and  field 
evaluations.  In: Proceedings  of  the  16th  international  conference  on 
Human-computer interaction with mobile devices & services. ACM. 

[48]   Alessandro  Puiatti,  Steven  Mudda,  Silvia  Giordano  and  Oscar 
Mayora.  2011.  Smartphone-centred  wearable  sensors  network  for 
monitoring patients with bipolar disorder. In Engineering in Medicine 
and Biology Society, EMBC, 2011 annual international conference of 
the IEEE. 

[49]   William T. Riley, Daniel E. Rivera, Audie A. Atienza, Wendy Nilsen, 
Susannah M. Allison and Robin Mermelstein. 2011. Health behaviour 
models in the age of mobile interventions: are our theories up to the 
task?. Translational Behavioural Medicine, Volume 1, Issue 1. 

[50]   James A. Russell and Merry Bullock. 1985.Multidimensional scaling of 
emotional facial expressions of emotion. J Pers Soc Psychol 48:1290–
1298 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 703Page 13 
 
 
 
 
[51]   Ana-Maria  Salai  and  Lynne  Baillie.  2018.  Exploring  the  Key  Design 
Functions  of  an  Overactive  Bladder  Mobile  Health  Application. 
In Proceedings  of  the  20th  International  Conference  on  Human-
Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services Adjunct (pp. 
229-236). ACM.  

[52]  Chris  Shaw.  2001.  A  review  of  the  psychosocial  predictors  of  help‐
seeking  behaviour  and  impact  on  quality  of  life  in  people  with 
urinary incontinence. Journal of Clinical Nursing.  

[53]   Smartphone adoption in the United Kingdom (UK) from 2011 to 2018. 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/271460/smartphone-

2018. 
adoption-in-the-united-kingdom-uk/ 

[54]   Solitaire, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patience_(game) 
[55]   Squeezy  -  the  NHS  Physiotherapy  App  for  Pelvic  Floor  Muscle 
https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/squeezy-nhs-

Exercises. 
2015. 
physiotherapy/id700740791?mt=8 

[56]   David  O.  Sussman.  2007.  Overactive  Bladder:  Treatment  Options  in 
Primary  Care  Medicine.  The  Journal  of  the  American  Osteopathic 
Association, Vol 107, No 9. 

[57]  UroToday 

Bladder 

Diary 

App. 

2015. 

http://www.urotoday.com/about/1214-site-pages/53578-urotoday-
bladder-diary-app.html 

[58]  Stephen  Uzor,  Lynne  Baillie  and  Dawn  Skelton.  2012.  Senior 
to  Design  Enjoyable  Falls 

Designers:  Empowering  Seniors 
Rehabilitation Tools. In Proc. ACM CHI’12. 

[59]   Stephen Uzor and Lynne Baillie. 2018. Exploring the Communication 
of  Progress  in  Home-based  Falls  Rehabilitation  using  Exergame 
Technologies.  Proceedings  of  the  ACM  on  Interactive,  Mobile, 
Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies.  

[60]   Leena  Ventä, Minna  Isomursu, Aino  Ahtinen  and Shruti  Ramiah. 
2008. My Phone is a Part of My Soul – How People Bond with Their 
Mobile Phones. In Proc. ACM MobileHCI’08. 

[61]   Lois M. Verbrugg 1980. Health diaries. Medical care 18.1: 73-95. 
[62]  Graham  Wilson  and  Stephen  A.  Brewster.  2017.  Multi-Moji: 
Combining  Thermal,  Vibrotactile  &  Visual  Stimuli  to  Expand  the 
Affective Range of Feedback. In Proc. CHI’17. 

[63]   2048, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2048_(video_game) 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 703Page 14 
 
 
 
 
