Barriers and Negative Nudges:  
Exploring Challenges in Food Journaling   
Felicia Cordeiro1, Daniel A. Epstein1, Edison Thomaz3, Elizabeth Bales1,2, 
Arvind K. Jagannathan3, Gregory D. Abowd3, James Fogarty1 

1 Computer Science & Engineering 
2 Human Centered Design & Engineering 
DUB Group, University of Washington 
{felicia0, depstein, lizbales, jfogarty} 
@cs.washington.edu 

ABSTRACT  
Although food journaling is understood to be both important 
and  difficult,  little  work  has  empirically  documented  the 
specific  challenges  people  experience  with  food  journals. 
We identify key challenges in a qualitative study combining 
a  survey  of  141  current  and  lapsed  food  journalers  with 
analysis of 5,526 posts in community forums for three mobile 
food  journals.  Analyzing  themes  in  this  data,  we  find  and 
discuss  barriers  to  reliable  food  entry,  negative  nudges 
caused  by  current  techniques,  and  challenges  with  social 
features.  Our  results  motivate  research  exploring  a  wider 
range of approaches to food journal design and technology. 

Author Keywords  
Personal Informatics; Food Journals; Barriers; Negative Nudges. 

ACM Classification  Keywords  
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI). 

INTRODUCTION 
Food  journals  are  an  important  method  for  tracking  food 
consumption  and  can  support  a  variety  of  goals,  including 
weight  loss,  healthier  food  choices,  detecting  deficiencies, 
identifying allergies, and determining foods that trigger other 
symptoms.  Although  food  journaling  is  widely  considered 
difficult  and  has  motivated  research  on  easing  or  even 
automating  entry,  little  work  has  empirically  documented 
why it is difficult. As a result, the field is currently missing 
opportunities for design and technology to improve journaling. 

Our work explores key challenges people encounter in food 
journaling.  We  conduct  a  qualitative  study  combining  a 
survey of 141 current and lapsed food journalers with analysis 
of  5,526  posts  from  community  forums  for  three  mobile 
food  journals.  Analyzing  themes  in  this  data,  we  find  and 
discuss  barriers  to  reliable  food  entry,  negative  nudges 
caused  by  current  techniques,  and  challenges  with  social 

Permission to make  digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not  made  or 
distributed for  profit or commercial advantage and t  hat copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work 
owned  by   others  than  ACM  must  be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is 
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  
Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.   
CHI 2015, April 18  - 23 2015, Seoul, Republic of Korea   
Copyright 2015 ACM 978-1-4503-3145-6/15/04$15.00   
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702155  

3 School of Interactive Computing 
College of Computing 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
{ethomaz, arvind.krishnaa, abowd} 
@gatech.edu 

features.  Our  results  support  continued  research  in  food 
journaling,  identify  specific  challenges  in  current  journals, 
and  highlight  opportunities  to  consider  a  wider  range  of 
opportunities in food journal design and technology. 

RELATED WORK  
Recent years have seen significant research in mobile food 
journals, which aim to improve entry or feedback relative to 
traditional  paper  methods.  An  early  example  is  PmEB, 
which demonstrated daily calorie budget feedback computed 
from a  mobile food journal [9]. Siek et al. studied journals 
for patients with chronic kidney disease, who found barcode 
and audio-based journals overwhelming [7]. Mamykina et al. 
developed MAHI, a mobile food journal to aid people with 
newly  diagnosed  diabetes  in  developing  reflective  analysis 
skills, essential to successful diabetes management [4]. 

Given the effectiveness of such systems, additional research 
has considered the adoption, difficulty, and everyday use of 
food journals. Helander et al. analyze logs from The Eatery, 
finding only 3% of 190,000 downloads resulted in a person 
using the mobile food journal for more than one week [3]. 
PlateMate  examines  minimizing  burden  of  entry  by  using 
crowdsourcing  to  obtain  nutritional  summaries  from  food 
photos  [5].  Rooksby  et  al.  discuss  challenges  of  personal 
informatics  and  argue  for  considering  how  tracking  is 
intertwined  with  everyday  life  [6].  Grimes  and  Harper 
suggest  that  research  should  consider  the  variety  of 
relationships people have with food [2]. Despite such interest 
in  how  food  journals  integrate  in  everyday  life,  relatively 
little is known about specific challenges people experience 
with food journals. We explore current challenges to inform 
future contributions in food journal design and technology. 

DATA COLLECTION 
We  surveyed  141  food  journalers  (47  active,  94  lapsed, 
105 female,  36  male,  age  19  to  70,  mean  34,  median  30), 
recruited from university mailing lists, MyFitnessPal Facebook 
groups,  and  FitBit  forums,  randomly  raffling  three  $20 
Amazon  gift  cards.  117 reported  journaling  with  mobile 
apps, 23 desktop / website, and 47 using paper (some using 
multiple  methods).  We  also  examined  5,526  posts  in  627 
threads in community forums for three mobile food journals 
(MyFitnessPal,  FatSecret,  CalorieCount). We  quote  survey 
respondents as P## and attribute forum posts by community. 

The Value of the Village in CaregivingCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1159 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Survey respondents answered open response questions about 
what made journaling difficult and what aspects of journaling 
they  disliked.  They  next  used  a  seven-point  Likert  scale  to 
rate  the  difficulty  of  journaling  meal  types  (buffet  meals, 
ethnic  food,  fast  food,  foods  served  by  friends,  foods 
consumed  at  parties,  home-cooked  meals,  packaged  food, 
restaurant  meals).  Lapsed  journalers  additionally  provided 
open responses explaining why they stopped. Responses were 
analyzed in an affinity diagram exercise by two members of 
the team, yielding themes later coded by a third. 

We gathered community forum data using provided search 
interfaces,  which  allow  keyword  filtering  of  threads  and 
posts.  We  initiated  analysis  with  a  set  of  keyword  phrases 
targeting  causes  of  attrition  (e.g., “stop  logging”,  “no fun 
logging”,  “not  working”,  “tired  of  logging”).  With  these 
initial search phrases, we found posts such as “It is such a 
slow  and  tedious  process”  (FatSecret),  which  gave  insight 
into additional keywords to use in searches (e.g., “tedious”). 
We  examined  posts  using  summative  content  analysis, 
yielding  themes  we  had  not  originally  specified  that  were 
consistent with our survey analysis, as well as an additional 
theme on challenges in social features of food journals. 

RESULTS AND THEMES 
Goals Drive Journaling 
Journaling can end with a perceived success or at a defined 
endpoint. Successes included a “goal weight” (P46, P52, P53), 
understanding eating habits “I had developed a good sense 
of how many calories are in the different foods I eat and in 
what  proportions  I  was  eating  them”  (P68),  or learning  to 
make  healthier  food  choices  “I got a  grasp  on  what  to  eat 
and  how  to  eat  to  maintain  optimal  health”  (P126). 
Endpoints  included  identifying  a  recurring  problem  “I was 
trying to track down migraine triggers. Once we identified 
several  triggers,  I  stopped”  (P50)  and  the  end  of  a 
pregnancy  “I stopped  being  pregnant.  :)”  (P82).  Of  94 
lapsed journalers, only 22 indicated they no longer needed to 
journal because they received enough benefit. An additional 
12 reported periodic journaling: “to audit my consumption” 
(P85),  “whenever  I  wanted  to  lose  weight”  (P51).  A  few 
reported  journaling  with  no  clear  goal:  “I wasn’t  really 
trying  to  lose  weight  or  anything  but  was  simply  curious 
about  what  I  ate.  Once  I  got  a  decent  idea  of  my  eating 
habits, I didn’t really feel like continuing to journal” (P14). 

Although some journalers reach their goals or do not have a 
specific goal, this is a definite minority. The majority report 
significant challenges, sometimes leading them to abandon 
journaling altogether. We discuss these challenges in terms 
of barriers to reliable food entry, negative nudges in current 
journals, and challenges with social features. 

Barriers to Reliable Food Entry 
Our forum analysis found the effort required to journal is a 
major barrier: “if I hit a rough spot or start regaining some 
weight  I  will  go  back  to  counting  calories.  I hate  counting 
it's  tedious  but  yet  very  important”  (FatSecret).  Survey 
respondents also expressed this, describing food journaling 

as  “too  much  effort”,  “time-consuming”,  or  “tedious”  (31, 
27,  16  respondents).  Looking  more  closely,  we  unpacked 
this theme into four barriers to reliable food entry. 

What and How Much: Journalers report challenges knowing 
what  and  how  much  to  enter  in  journals  designed  around 
detailed  entry.  P98  summarizes:  “I  cook  most  of  my  own 
meals,  so  it  was  difficult  to  estimate  the  amounts  of  each 
ingredient  (first,  I  loosely  follow  recipes,  then  I  only  eat 
some  of  what  I  make  at  a  time),  then  find  the  calories 
(which  weren’t  available  for  many  of  the  foods  I  ate)”. 
Barriers  include  ingredients  (e.g.,  “Not  knowing  the  exact 
ingredients  and  portions  make  the  logging  difficult”  P126, 
75  others),  their  proportions  (e.g.,  “spaghetti:  How  much 
meat? How much oil? Etc…” P107, 10 others), preparation 
(e.g.,  “It  is  also  difficult  to  know  how  things  are  cooked 
sometimes, did they use oil?  Does that affect the calories?” 
P128,  27  others),  and  then  the  portion  consumed  (e.g., 
“I have a hard time figuring out portions” P23, 39 others). 
Uncertainty regarding any undermines reliability of an entry. 

Database  Reliability:  Many  journals  use  a  database  to 
convert  entries  into  calories,  other  components,  or  points. 
These often allow community contribution, with journalers 
able to publish nutritional entries themselves. Although  this 
can  enable  a  diverse  food  database,  it  raises  concerns 
regarding reliability:  “the  food  database  is  put  together by 
users, so not all entries can be considered accurate” (P32), 
“sometimes  hard  to  find  certain  foods,  or  to  know  enough 
about the listing to know if it will be accurate” (P129). 

Databases  are quite  large, but  journalers  find  categories of 
food missing. From our forum analysis: “Hey all. Any tips 
on  how  to  record  foods  not  found  in  database?  IE  made 
from  scratch, bought at a locally owned restaurant, etc. I'm 
finding  it  difficult  sometimes  to  find  something  close  and 
match it up, or to make a guess” (FatSecret). P2 reported it 
harder  to  find healthy  foods  “They  don’t  have  some  of  the 
foods I’d like to enter - like more of the healthy and organic 
foods.” P40 found common foods missing “there are large 
gaps particularly with foods that are only found in Canada.” 

However, continuing to grow the database presents its own 
barriers. Journalers report that obtaining many results from 
a query creates concerns for reliability “sometimes it was even 
incorrect  or  multiple  postings  with  all  different  information” 
(P101),  difficulty  choosing  “there  were  too  many  choices 
and it was difficult to determine which option was the closest 
to reality” (P105), and frustration with apparently irrelevant 
entries  “I  ate  some  oatmeal  and  my  options  for  logging  it 
were weird. Oh, was it McDonald’s oatmeal? Quaker Instant 
apple  cinnamon  oatmeal  in  a  pouch?  No.  It  was  normal 
oatmeal!” (P1). Food journal databases face a tension between 
providing desired foods versus overwhelming journalers. 

Eating  Context:  Journalers  report  barriers  entering  food 
from  restaurants,  prepared  by  friends,  from  buffets,  and  at 
parties. Part of the challenge is that knowledge barriers are 
magnified  because  the  journaler  did  not  prepare  the  food: 
“Meals at a restaurant are very difficult because you do not 

The Value of the Village in CaregivingCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1160 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
know the ingredients” (P99), “Foods eaten out were tricky 
due  to  the  ingredients  not  being  clear”  (P50),  “Calorie 
databases  have  some  entries  for  chain  restaurants,  but 
finding something that might be similar to a dish at a local 
restaurant is difficult, if not impossible” (P137). 

Another critical challenge in these contexts is people often 
consume a variety of food over an extended time. P69 felt it 
was unreasonable to journal: “You’re simply not going to sit 
there  with  each  thing  you  grab  and  log  it”.  This  leads  to 
delay,  which  leads  to  difficulty  remembering:  “when  I’m 
eating at a party, or at a buffet I usually eat small amounts 
of  lots  of  different  things.  Then  when  I  get  back  to  my 
apartment  and  go  to  log  it,  I’ve  often  forgotten  already 
exactly what I ate, and I’m sure I often miss things.” (P130) 
and  “It  was  hard  to  log  when  I  wasn’t  at  home  because  I 
had to remember to when I got home” (P112). Despite the 
always-available nature of mobile devices, contexts in which 
people  eat  present  significant  barriers  to  in-the-moment 
journaling practices that mobile journals aim to promote. 

Losing  the  Habit:  Simply  forgetting  to  journal  is  a  major 
barrier  to  reliable  journals,  and  was  the  most-cited  reason 
why survey respondents had missed at least one entry. But 
journalers  further  report  that  missed  entries  can  lead  them 
to abandon journaling altogether. In journals that emphasize 
calories  or  other  summaries  of  food  components,  missing 
an entry means feedback is inaccurate: “Half of the time, I 
would just log foods for half the day, so the calories totals 
were  completely  off.”  (P137).  This  can  in  turn  create  a 
feedback cycle that undermines the journaling habit: “Every 
time I start I forget one meal or another so it becomes less 
accurate. Then I just forget completely.” (P128). P42 noted 
other factors can lead to breakdowns in her journaling habit 
“e.g.,  due  to  a  hard  deadline,  travel,  holiday  season”,  and 
reported “once the habit is broken…it’s hard to start again.” 
Journals cannot assume continuous and complete compliance, 
and should instead support the journaling habit. 

Negative Nudges in Current Food Journals   
Nudges are features of systems that alter behavior [8]. They 
are  typically  designed  to  promote  a  desired  behavior,  but 
we  found  examples  of  unintentional  negative  nudges  in 
current food journals. Journalers report the design of current 
journals can encourage behaviors contrary to their goals. 

Contrasting Difficulty of Meal Entry: When asked to rate 
difficulty  by  meal  type,  respondents  rated  packaged  food 
(average:  6.5)  and  fast  food  (6.3)  as  significantly  easier  to 
journal  than  home-cooked  meals  (4.6),  buffet  meals  (3.7), 
ethnic  food  (3.7),  restaurant  meals  (3.6),  foods  served  by 
friends  (3.2),  and  foods  consumed  at  parties  (2.9)  (using a 
mixed-model  analysis  of  variance,  with  participant  as  a 
random effect, applying Tukey’s HSD at p < .05). 

Journalers  report  databases  make  packaged  and  fast  food 
easiest to log, with barcodes further simplifying their entry: 
“It was easy to search specific brands” (P67), “Fast foods and 
prepackaged  foods  have  calorie  counts  readily  available” 
(P86).  In  contrast,  journalers  report  difficulty  entering 

homemade  food:  “took  too  much  time,  hard  to  track  meals 
that aren’t pre-packaged” (P43), “a lot of foods are difficult 
to track without an ingredient list or barcode” (P45). 

Many journals provide recipe builders intended to ease the 
difficulty  of  entering  homemade  food.  Journalers  were 
aware  of  this,  but  still  considered  it  burdensome  to  enter 
homemade food: “recipe builders took a long time” (P78), 
“If  a  particular  item  isn’t  in  my  app’s  database,  I  would 
have  to  deconstruct  it  into  its  constituent  ingredients  and 
then  add  those  individually.”  (P3),  “I  often  had  to  search 
for lots of individual components, and I wasn’t sure of the 
measurements” (P47). An additional challenge with recipes 
is  that  journalers  report  they  do  not  support  variation  in 
preparation: “Even with options to create a meal and save it 
for later. Most of my cooking isn’t that consistent.” (P101). 

This  difficulty  contrast  creates  a  dilemma:  “Prepackaged 
meals  were  the  easiest  because  of  bar  codes  but  those 
aren’t  healthy”  (P123).  This  can  undermine  the  journaling 
habit:  “I usually  stop  [journaling]  shortly  after  I  made  a 
wrap or some other type of sandwich that has a significant 
number of components that it would be difficult to measure 
and  manually  add”  (P105).  Journalers  also  reported  it  can 
nudge  them to  eat  contrary  to  their  goals,  including  eating 
less  variety  “I  could  make  life  easier  by  eating  the  same 
things regularly” (P97), limiting food choice “I just avoided 
eating  things  that  were  hard  to  log”  (P132),  and  avoiding 
healthier foods “the time it took entering it manually made 
eating  fresh  and  healthy  less  appealing.  Easier  to  scan  a 
code on some processed stuff and be done with it” (P101). 
Although the mindfulness created by journaling can lead to 
healthier  choices,  the  difficulty  of  food  entry  in  current 
designs is also negatively impacting journaler food choices. 

Judgment and Choosing Not to Journal: Food journalers 
report feelings of shame, judgment, or obsession associated 
with current designs. P6 reported journaling “made me feel 
guilty  sometimes”,  while  P27  noted  a  lack  of  positive 
feedback:  “I  always  felt  guilty  when  I  ate  too  much,  and 
there  wasn't  that  much  pride  when  I  was  under  my  goal.” 
Others described not wanting to journal foods they considered 
unhealthy  or  that  may  put  them  over  a  calorie  goal: 
“Sometimes I feel like not logging things because I know it’s 
really  unhealthy. =(”  (P117).  Journalers  report  abandoning 
journaling due to these feelings: “I stopped because I didn’t 
feel  a  need  to  keep  it  up.  I  did  not  want  to  obsess  about 
food”  (P13),  “it  made me  too  focused  and  obsessive  about 
what  I  was  eating”  (P70),  “I think  I'm  obsessing  about 
every calorie and I'm either not eating enough or eating too 
much”  (MyFitnessPal).  P113  was  especially  concerned: 
“it was  more of  an  on  the  way  to  an  eating  disorder  thing 
than  anything  else  (tried  to  keep  calories  extremely  low)”. 
Although in-the-moment feedback can be powerful, designs 
that create feelings of judgment can be self-defeating. 

Stigma and Journaling: Journaling often takes place in the 
presence  of  others,  and  P37  noted  “it’s  not  always  that 
discreet”.  Many  did  not  want  friends  and  colleagues  to 

The Value of the Village in CaregivingCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1161 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
know they were tracking food “I think I was hesitant to do 
the  logging  if  not  alone”  (P30)  and  were  afraid  to  ask  the 
ingredients  in  food  “I  had  more  of  a  problem  with  eating 
out  at  a  friend’s  house  because  I  didn’t  want  to  ask  for 
ingredients  or  mention  that I  was  logging  calories”  (P11). 
This  can  lead  people  to  abandon  journaling:  “I  also  felt 
embarrassed to do it in front of friends so I stopped” (P27). 
Journalers also report being nudged to avoid social situations: 
“It discourages you from eating out or at a friend’s, even if 
it is healthy” (P42). Journalers can struggle with a perceived 
stigma around tracking, undermining not only the reliability 
of their journal but also their goals and motivation. 

Challenges in  Social Features  
The  previous  challenges  emerged  in  both  datasets,  but  our 
community  forum analysis  additionally  surfaced  challenges 
in provided social features. Journalers turn to these for social 
support “please if you want to motivate me and help me out 
with  comments  and  suggestions,  add  me  as  a  friend” 
(MyFitnessPal),  and  some  find  that  support  “I  have  found 
that  having  friends  on  MFP  has  helped  me,  just  having 
someone say good job when I do my exercise or finish under 
my  calorie  goals”  (MyFitnessPal).  But  others  find  support 
never  materializes  “I  have  seen  lately  that  I  will  post  my 
diary or my progress or even some troubles and no one will 
comment back. How is that going to encourage me to keep 
going  when  I  have  no  support”  (MyFitnessPal),  that  their 
motivation is undermined as friends stop journaling “Although 
I used to log frequently in the past, most of my connections 
have  stopped  logging  in  or  are  no  longer  members,  so  I 
recently  emptied  my  ‘buddy  list’”  (FatSecret),  or  they  are 
discouraged  by  the  success  of  others  “I hate  coming  on  to 
forums  and  seeing  how  much  people  have  lost  and  I  have 
made barely any progress at all.” (FatSecret). Embarrassment 
leads people to omit entries or disable sharing: “I have logged 
food  on  here  before  but  I  get  embarrassed  so  I  made  it 
private  so  only  I  can  see  and  told  myself  be  honest  with 
yourself” (MyFitnessPal). Social features can both support or 
undermine journalers, and need to be carefully considered. 

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
We  have  contributed  a  qualitative  analysis  of  two  datasets 
to empirically document specific challenges people encounter 
in  food  journaling.  By  unpacking  “too  much  effort”  into 
specific  challenges,  our  findings  suggest  opportunities  to 
improve food journaling design and technology. 

One  important  opportunity  is  to  consider  journaler  goals 
and  how  they  relate  to  these  challenges.  For  example, 
detailed  nutritional  data  may  be  important  to  a  journaler 
pursuing  weight  loss.  But  the  challenges  in  obtaining  that 
data  might  be  inappropriate  for  a  journaler  looking  to 
identify a food trigger or gain a higher-level understanding 
of  food  habits  (e.g.,  for  whom  “oatmeal”  is  sufficient). 
Conversely,  details  of  preparation  might  be  irrelevant  to  a 
to 
journaler 
identifying  a food  trigger.  Instead  of  attempting  to  capture 
the  elusive  “everything”,  these  findings  suggest  a diversity 
of journal designs to support specific goals. 

in  calories  but  critical 

interested  only 

Challenges with food databases suggest several opportunities. 
A reputation system might address reliability of community 
entries, and could consider goals (e.g., a journaler tracking 
sodium intake may find an entry more reliable if created by 
another journaler with a similar goal). Further, a community 
could vote on the accuracy of a contributed entry (e.g. “6 of 8 
journalers  agree  with  this  assessment  of  calories”).  The 
tension  between  databases  providing  desired  foods  but 
overwhelming journalers might be addressed using context 
(e.g., surface likely food at a particular restaurant), personal 
diets  (e.g.,  a  vegetarian’s  journal),  routines  (e.g.,  a  person 
may  always  have  the  same  espresso  drink),  or  designs  for 
lower-fidelity  journals  (e.g.,  using  nutritional  information 
from a generic “oatmeal” entry instead of strictly requiring 
greater disambiguation for a minor nutritional difference). 

One  initial  promising  opportunity  we  have  pursued  is  a 
photo-based  food  journal,  which  can  level  the  challenge  of 
journaling  different  meal  types,  provide  value  in  spite  of 
missing  entries,  and  avoid  creating  judgment  by  not 
emphasizing nutritional details [1]. But our findings point out 
a  variety  of  challenges  in  food  journaling  and  motivate 
future research exploring how new designs and technology 
can support journalers in their food-related goals. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank Ravi Karkar, Julie Kientz, and Sean Munson for feedback 
and analysis. This work was funded in part by the Intel Science and 
Technology Center for Pervasive Computing, by the National Science 
Foundation  under  awards  OAI-1028195  and  SCH-1344613,  and  by 
the National Institutes of Health under award 1U54EB020404-01. 

REFERENCES 
1. Cordeiro F, Bales E, Cherry E, & Fogarty J. Rethinking
the Mobile Food Journal: Exploring Opportunities for
Lightweight Photo-Based Capture. CHI 2015, to Appear.

2. Grimes A & Harper R. Celebratory Technology : New

Directions for Food Research in HCI. CHI 2008, 467–476.
3. Helander E, Kaipainen K, Korhonen I, & Wansink B. Factors
Related to Sustained Use of a Free Mobile App for Dietary
Self-Monitoring With Photography and Peer Feedback:
Retrospective Cohort Study. J Med Internet Res 16, 4 (2014), e109. 

4. Mamykina L, Mynatt ED, Davidson PR, & Greenblatt D.
MAHI : Investigation of Social Scaffolding for Reflective
Thinking in Diabetes Management. CHI 2008, 477–486.
5. Noronha J, Hysen E, Zhang H, & Gajos KZ. PlateMate:

Crowdsourcing Nutrition Analysis from Food Photographs.
UIST 2011, 1–12.

6. Rooksby J, Rost M, Morrison A, & Chalmers M. Personal
Tracking as Lived Informatics. CHI 2014, 1163–1172.
7. Siek KA, Connelly KH, Rogers Y, Rohwer P, Lambert D, &
Welch JL. When Do We Eat ? An Evaluation of Food Items
Input into an Electronic Food Monitoring Application.
PervasiveHealth 2006, 1–10.

8. Thaler RH & Sunstein CR. Nudge: Improving Decisions

about Health, Wealth, and Happiness. 2008.

9. Tsai CC, Lee G, Raab F, Norman GJ, Sohn T, Griswold WG,
& Patrick K. Usability and Feasibility of PmEB: A Mobile
Phone Application for Monitoring Real Time Caloric Balance.
Mobile Networks and Applications 12, 2-3 (2007), 173–184.

The Value of the Village in CaregivingCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1162 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
