Blood Pressure Beyond the Clinic:  
Rethinking a Health Metric for Everyone  
Logan Kendall1,2, Dan Morris1, Desney Tan1 

1Microsoft Research 
{dan; desney}@microsoft.com 

ABSTRACT 
Blood pressure (BP) is typically captured at irregular inter-
vals, mostly in clinic environments. This approach treats BP 
as a static snapshot for health classification and largely ig-
nores its value as a continuously fluctuating measure. Rec-
ognizing  that  consumers  are  increasingly  capturing  health 
metrics  through  wearable  devices,  we  explored  BP  meas-
urement in relation to everyday living through a two-week 
field  study with  34  adults.  Based  on  questionnaires,  meas-
urement  logs,  and  interviews,  we  examined  participants’ 
perceptions  and  attitudes  towards  BP  variability  and  their 
associations of BP with aspects of their lives. We found that 
participants modified their use of BP devices in response to 
BP  variability,  made  associations  with  stress,  food,  and 
daily  routines,  and  revealed  challenges  with  the  design  of 
current  BP  devices  for  personal  use.  We  present  design 
recommendations for BP use in everyday contexts and de-
scribe strategies for re-framing BP capture and reporting. 

Author Keywords 
Personal informatics; blood pressure; self-monitoring. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
J.3. Life and medical sciences: Health. 

INTRODUCTION 
Blood pressure (BP) is an important and widely used indi-
cator for assessing cardiovascular health. One in five hyper-
tensive  individuals  are  not  even  aware  they  have  high  BP 
and  overall  public  understanding  of  BP  is  poor  [3,11]. 
Young  adults  in  particular  are  less  likely  to  be  aware  of 
their  blood  pressure.  However,  recent  longitudinal  studies 
have shown that capturing blood pressure at an earlier age 
and evaluating it over a lifetime provides valuable data for 
understanding and predicting cardiovascular risk [1]. 

Limited  awareness  and  understanding  of  blood  pressure  is 
due in part to the fact that BP measurement is typically sit-

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal
or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not  made  or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work
owned  by  others  than  the  ACM  must  be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute
to  lists,  requires  prior  specific  permission  and/or  a  fee.  Request  permissions
from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2015, April 18–23, 2015, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3145-6/15/04…$15.00. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702576 

2Biomedical and Health Informatics 
University of Washington 
kendall5@uw.edu 

uated  in  the  clinic.  However,  metrics  typically  captured  in 
this  context  or  through  cumbersome  devices  are  becoming 
more accessible to consumers through noninvasive, weara-
ble  sensors  designed  to  support  personal  monitoring.  The 
success  of  consumer  devices  like  the  Fitbit  demonstrates 
deep interest in leveraging sensor data to learn about, reflect 
upon, and inform lifestyle choices. In particular, the ubiqui-
tous  nature  of  these  sensors  creates  a  shift  from  ad  hoc 
measurement towards continuous capture within the context 
of normal daily activities. For a health indicator like blood 
pressure,  continued  advancement  of  tools  such  as  wrist-
worn,  cuffless,  continuous  BP  monitors  [22]  suggest  a  fu-
ture in which cardiovascular metrics are captured as easily 
as  the  activity  data  dominating  the  current  wearable  tech-
nology market.  

For this study, we explore the concept of ubiquitous health 
sensing  in  relation  to  BP  monitoring  by  evaluating  how 
people use and relate to their BP measurements outside of a 
typical  medical  context.  To  explore  this  potential  future 
state  for  personal  health  sensing,  we  first  describe  related 
work on home BP measurement, its relationship to personal 
health  informatics,  and  challenges  with  communicating 
measurement  uncertainty.  Second,  we  describe  our  study 
design  and  descriptive  findings.  Third,  we  outline  the 
themes  elicited  from  questionnaires,  participants’  BP  logs, 
and  semi-structured  interviews  conducted  with  each  study 
participant. We conclude with a discussion of design oppor-
tunities  to  enhance  the  experience  of  BP  measurement  for 
personal health and well-being. 

Based  on  participants’  experiences, we  provide  three  main 
contributions  in  this  paper:  (1)  we  improve  understanding 
of  a  healthy  population’s  attitudes  and  motivations  toward 
BP  variability  and  monitoring,  (2)  we  identify  aspects  of 
everyday  living  that  people  associate  with  their  BP  meas-
urement, and (3) we recommend design strategies to make 
this metric intelligible and relevant for personal monitoring. 

BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 

Fundamentals of BP and BP variability 
A  BP  measurement  is  a  snapshot  of  the  force  of  blood 
pressing on the arteries as the pressure rises and falls with 
each  heartbeat.  BP  is  measured  in  units  of  millimeters  of 
mercury  (mmHg),  typically  using  an  inflatable  cuff  that 
exerts pressure on the outside of a part of the body to obtain 
the arterial pressure. Optimal BP is clinically defined as less 

DIY Healthcare: Apps & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1679 
 
than 120/80 mmHg, where the upper value is systolic pres-
sure (SBP) and the lower value is diastolic pressure (DBP).  

BP is frequently discussed as a static snapshot of SBP and 
DBP, however it is a dynamic process with natural fluctua-
tions  over  the  course  of  days,  weeks,  and  months.  People 
usually  experience  changes  throughout  the  day  such  as  a 
nighttime dip in pressure in accordance with one’s circadian 
rhythm [14]. Systolic BP typically varies by approximately 
10-15 mmHg during the daytime and 5-10 mmHg at night 
[27].  BP  can  also  fluctuate  dramatically  due  to  short-term 
influences that affect cardiac output and vascular resistance. 
Caffeine  significantly  increases  SBP  by  5-10  mmHg  and 
psychological  stress  and  physical  exertion  can  cause  an 
increase of 20-60 mmHg [16,21,27]. Sleeping, eating, and a 
variety of other activities are also correlated with dynamic 
changes  in  BP  yet  occur  sporadically,  making  the  changes 
difficult to identify without continuous monitoring [27].  

Value of BP measurement outside the clinic 
These  short-term  fluctuations  in  BP  are  important  because 
significant  variation  may  cause  subtle  arterial  damage  that 
raises average BP over long periods [20]. However, clinic-
based measurement, considered the standard for BP classi-
fication,  is  how  most  people  assess  their  BP.  The  clinic 
setting may not be optimal due to limitations in its capacity 
to  accurately  measure  BP  in  certain  contexts  [26]  and  the 
fact that 15% of adults do not visit their providers annually 
[23].  Instead,  studies  show  that  BP  monitoring  at  home  is 
better  at  predicting  cardiovascular  risk  than  measurements 
in  the  clinic  [19,24].  Though  automated  ambulatory  moni-
toring  is  becoming  more widespread,  it  is cost-prohibitive, 
requires  clinical  guidance,  and  necessitates  wearing  a  cuff 
that auto-inflates every 30-60 minutes for at least 24 hours.  

As a result, home BP devices have become a preferred al-
ternative for BP assessment. Yet home devices are still de-
signed based on clinical needs and not with personal use in 
mind. In a study focused on elderly adults, researchers de-
scribed  usability  challenges  with  patients  reliably  measur-
ing their BP, interpreting the results, and integrating meas-
urement  into  daily  routines  [12].  Despite  these  challenges, 
home  monitoring  has  the  potential  to  positively  influence 
quality of life and empower individuals when it is integrat-
ed successfully into everyday living [5]. 

Growth of personal health monitoring 
Challenges with user-device interaction for health monitor-
ing are not limited to elderly or at-risk populations despite 
the  research  emphasis  on  these  groups.  Increasingly  cheap 
sensors  have  encouraged  rapid  growth  in  the  personal 
health  sensing  market  in  the  US  [9].  Tracking  health  met-
rics  enables  people  to  learn  more  about  their  specific  con-
text and motivate lifestyle changes. Li et al. described how 
collecting  behavioral  information  along  with  physiological 
metrics  helps  foster  insight  and  promote  positive  behavior 
[17].  Choe  and  colleagues  build  on  this  work,  noting  a 
strong  interest  in  health  metrics  among  self-trackers,  but 

highlighting breakdowns that may inhibit tracking behavior 
[4].  Other  research  highlights  how  perceptions  of  personal 
monitoring  devices  for  general  living,  wellness,  or  illness 
affect how people use them in the home [13]. Epstein et al. 
identified how various data representations supported users 
to  make  discoveries  about  their  behavior  and  identify  op-
portunities for change [8]. These conclusions align with the 
observations  of  Bentley  et  al.  regarding  the  importance  of 
promoting  self-reflection  and  linking  multiple  streams  of 
data to promote meaningful personal monitoring [2]. As BP 
becomes easier to capture, it can serve as a key metric sup-
porting lifestyle monitoring and personal health. 

Measurement uncertainty with BP devices 
BP  measurement  also  introduces  variability  due  to  signal 
noise  and  lenient  validation  protocols.  Devices  that  meet 
current  validation  criteria  may  still  be  inaccurate  by  more 
than 5 mmHg in a given measurement for more than half of 
users  [10].  This  level  of  error  introduces  challenges  to  in-
terpreting  singular  snapshots  of  BP  and  can  lead  someone 
to classify their blood pressure and health risk incorrectly.  

How  users  understand  and  accept  this  type  of  variability 
reflects  a  common  challenge  with  sensing  tools  that  must 
provide reliable feedback despite measurement uncertainty. 
Lim and Dey introduce the concept of intelligibility to de-
scribe  how  well  context-aware  systems  communicate  rea-
soning or uncertainty [18]. In the health domain, Kay et al. 
explored  the  intelligibility  of  scales  in  communicating 
weight  fluctuations.  Importantly,  Kay  et  al.  found  that  a 
person’s understanding of weight fluctuation was associated 
with  their  trust  in  the  scales’  capabilities  [15].  Similar  to 
scales,  displaying  BP  as  a  static  snapshot  without  com-
municating measurement uncertainty may impact user per-
ception of BP devices over time.  

Based on this related work, we assert there is an opportuni-
ty to reframe BP for a broader audience, motivated by per-
sonal  monitoring  outside  of  the  clinic.  Brief,  infrequent 
clinic  visits  limit  the  ability  of  providers  to  assess  short-
term changes in BP or to account for in-clinic measurement 
variation.  Individual  use  of  BP  devices  outside  the  clinic 
more accurately encapsulates BP as dynamic variable, how-
ever, the way users respond to this variability is poorly un-
derstood. Moreover, BP’s sensitivity to environmental vari-
ables shows promise as a metric for self-tracking and link-
ing  with  aspects  of  daily  living.  Our  study  illuminates  the 
value and challenges of BP capture for personal informatics 
use among a population not familiar with BP monitoring. 

STUDY OVERVIEW 

Participants 
Since  monitoring  has  been  studied  extensively  in  popula-
tions with high BP, we excluded persons who were actively 
taking BP medication or had been diagnosed with hyperten-
sion  or  other  cardiovascular  diseases.  This  increased  the 
likelihood that our participants had limited experience with 

DIY Healthcare: Apps & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1680Figure 1. Screenshot of a mobile web app used by participants to collect each blood pressure measurement. For the second week of 
the study period, participants could see a 72 hour visual summary of their BP data. 

monitoring their BP. We also required that participants own 
a smartphone or tablet so that they could use our web-based 
logging tool (Figure 1) regardless of their location. 

Using purposeful sampling based on age and gender to en-
sure  representation  from  an  adult  population,  we  recruited 
participants from a large volunteer database. Thirty-four (17 
female) persons, aged 23 to 53 (mean=36.6, SD=7.8), par-
ticipated  in  the  study.  All  participants  had  some  college-
level education, with 27 holding a college degree or higher. 
Participants indicated a high level of physical activity, with 
79% reporting exercising outside of work on a daily basis. 
Also,  68%  of  participants  stated  that  they  had  previously 
measured their BP outside of a clinic, such as at a pharmacy 
kiosk or at home with a personal BP device. 

Study protocol and analysis 
At  the  beginning  and  end  of  the  study,  participants  com-
pleted  a  questionnaire  covering  demographic  details  and 
knowledge, beliefs, and attitudes about BP. For evaluations 
of changes in responses pre- and post-study, we used paired 
Wilcoxon  Signed-Rank  tests.  We  also  collected  and  sum-
marized  a  brief  follow-up  survey  distributed  60  days  after 
the  end  of  the  study.  Each  participant  received  a  gratuity 
and kept their BP cuff after finishing the study. To encour-
age adherence to our protocol, participants who averaged at 
least four recordings daily received an extra gratuity. 

At baseline, participants received a MicroLife BP3MC1-PC 
portable  upper-arm  BP  monitoring  cuff  that  has  been vali-
dated  for  clinic  and  home  use  [7].  The  investigators  also 
reviewed standard protocol for BP measurement with each 
person and had them take their baseline BP reading. Partic-

 n=2,181  Mean  Median  Min  Max 
SBP 
DBP 
Pulse 

SD 
170  13.1 
145  10.2 
145  15.5 

127 
81 
74 

126 
80 
72 

90 
42 
28 

ipants  then  measured  their  BP  daily  at  five  points  spread 
throughout  the  day  for  14  days.  This  served  as  an  experi-
mental  surrogate  for  a  future  of  more  continuous,  cuffless 
measurement  for  which  technology  is  already  emerging. 
Our  study  design  differs  from  clinic-defined  home  proto-
cols to give participants the opportunity to see their BP as a 
continuously  fluctuating  variable  and  not  just  a  means  for 
diagnosis  and  monitoring.  All  participants  opted  in  to  re-
ceive  text  and/or  email  reminders  sent  periodically  during 
the day to support adherence. After each measurement, par-
ticipants completed a mini-questionnaire delivered through 
a  web-based  app  that  assessed  contextual  data  known  to 
influence  BP—caffeine  intake,  stress,  or  exercise—based 
on activities in the hour preceding the BP recording (Figure 
1). The questionnaire also provided space for participants to 
comment on each measurement. For the final week, partici-
pants  were  given  access  to  a  72-hour  visual  summary  of 
their BP trends and a table summary of their average, high-
est, and lowest values for SBP, DBP, and pulse. 

Summarized in Table 1, over the course of the study period, 
participants  recorded  2,181  BP  measurements  (mean  4.6 
per  day  per  participant)  and  entered  brief  structured  infor-
mation about each measurement. Figure 2 shows the distri-
bution of measurements by time of day with peaks at 8am, 
12pm,  and  9pm.  Across  the  BP  recordings,  84%  were 
measured while sitting, 11% standing, and 5% while lying 

150

125

100

75

50

25

0

M
A
2
1

M
A
2

M
A
4

M
A
6

M
A
8

M
A
0
1

M
P
2
1

M
P
2

M
P
4

M
P
6

M
P
8

M
P
0
1

Table 1. Descriptive summary of BP measurements rec-
orded by participants during the 14 day study period. 

Figure 2. Overview of the number participant recordings by 
time of day. Evening hours are shaded in gray.

DIY Healthcare: Apps & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1681   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
down. For more than half of the entries (56%), participants 
made  brief,  open-ended  notes  about  the  measurement  they 
had  just  taken.  The  three  authors  independently  coded  a 
subset  of  the participants’  logs  entries  to  identify  common 
themes that were then used to code all of the entries.  

At days 7 and 14, we conducted a semi-structured interview 
with each participant during which we provided them with 
a summary of their BP log and reviewed the data with them. 
We conducted 68 interview sessions totaling 45 hours. Each 
session  averaged  40  minutes  (range:  26–61  min)  and  fo-
cused on the participant’s recent experiences with using the 
BP  device.  All  interviews  were  transcribed  and  reviewed 
for preliminary themes. The authors organized the emerging 
concepts  into  an  affinity  diagram  to  help  identify  higher-
level concepts and relationships among terms. They iterated 
on codes through several rounds in order to focus in on the 
core  themes  used  for  this  article.  One  author  used  these 
themes  to  analyze  each  interview  using  Atlas.ti  7.  Finally, 
the remaining authors each coded a subset of the interviews 
to validate the themes and ensure reliability. 

RESULTS 
Based  on  interviews,  BP  logs,  and  questionnaires,  we  re-
view participants’ attitudes toward their use of BP devices 
in terms of accuracy, relevance to daily living, and impact 
on  their  sense  of  well-being.  We  also  highlight  challenges 
this cohort associated with using a BP device every day. 

Participant response to BP variability 
Prior research has established measure-to-measure variation 
at  clinics  between  10  and  20  mmHg  [27].  Our  analysis  of 
participant  recordings  that  were  measured  while  sitting 
showed  within-person  variation  of  ±5  to  ±15  SBP  during 
the study (Figure 3). We found that participants were very 
sensitive  to  the  variation  that  they  experienced  over  the 
study  period  and  demonstrated  a  variety  of  behaviors  and 
strategies when they noticed deviations from their usual BP. 

Evaluating measurement accuracy and consistency 
Measurement variability, whether from the device or a nat-
ural change, challenged participants’ level of trust in a giv-
en measure. When the device reported a value outside of an 
expected range, participants would take extra steps such as 
taking  repeat  measures  to  evaluate  its  accuracy.  If  the  re-
sults appeared consistent over time, they seemed reassured: 

“I  wouldn’t  bet  on  those  numbers  with  my  life,  but  I 
would  say  that  they  are  within  a  range  that  works,  be-
cause I can literally sit down and sometimes I do just take 
my  blood  pressure  three  times  in  a  row  just  to  see  how 
accurate it is. And the numbers will fluctuate plus or mi-
nus 5 to 10 on the blood pressure [device].” (P18)  

Recognizing  consistency  in  the  measurements  was  an  im-
portant  consideration  for  many  of  the  participants.  They 
mentioned challenging settings such as being on a boat or in 
a car where they questioned the numbers because, “taking it 
in  places  with  me  in  different  variables  and  environments 
and stuff, I feel like you have to kind of baby it or it’s going 
to give you some crazy reading” (P27). However, finding a 
comfortable location and the appropriate amount of time to 
sit down and take the measurement was often a challenge. 

Comparing to other sources 
In  the  interviews,  participants  often  compared  the  study-
provided BP device with other sources of BP measurement. 
They visited their primary care clinic to compare with their 
doctor,  went  to  pharmacy  kiosk  machines,  and  also  tested 
their  device  relative  to  other BP  devices  that  family  mem-
bers  or  friends  owned.  One  person  (P14)  seemed  satisfied 
with the device used in the study, “because one of the days 
I actually went to the doctor and it was only like—the num-
ber is only like one or two different.”  

the  questionnaire,  participants 

Within 
indicated  what 
sources of BP measurement they trusted the most. Methods 
that  involved  multiple  measurements  were  ranked  highest. 
Although  the  overall  order  of  rankings  across  participants 
did  not  change  over  the  study  period,  more  participants 

Figure 3. Overview of within-person variation between participants. The top (orange) indicates the average and range for each 
participant’s SBP, the bottom (blue) for each person’s DBP. Overall within-person variation ranged from ±5 to ±15 SBP. 

DIY Healthcare: Apps & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1682 
gave  a  lower  ranking  to  single-point  measurements  at  the 
end of the study (one-tail, p<0.025 after Bonferroni correc-
tion).  This  suggests  that  our  study  cohort  placed  greater 
value on having multiple measurement points to assess BP 
versus casual, ad hoc approaches (Table 2).  

Using heart rate to gauge validity 
In  the  interviews,  participants  commented  that  they  paid 
attention to specific values within a given BP reading, espe-
cially  heart  rate,  as  a  way  of  deciding  if  the  measurement 
seemed  reasonable  or  not.  When  this  relationship  broke 
down, participants expressed greater doubt in the measure-
ment.  P34  had  a  normal  BP  reading  but  was  skeptical  be-
cause of what seemed like an inaccurate hear rate. “I don’t 
know  why  my  heart  rate  was  so  elevated.  I  wasn’t  doing 
anything, I felt fine but that’s what I read on the machine. I 
don’t know. Maybe it’s accurate, maybe it wasn’t” (P34).  

Understanding counter-intuitive fluctuations in BP 
The  variability  that  participants  experienced  occasionally 
ran counter to their expectations in relation to level of activ-
ity during the day. Participants expected their BP to be low-
er in the mornings as, “that’s going to probably be my most 
relaxed  part  of  the  day”  (P16).  In  contrast,  the  afternoons 
are when, “you would expect it to be a little higher because 
that’s the more 'active” portion of the day” (P30). Partici-
pants intuitively expected their BP to be low at times when 
they felt relaxed or when they had not recently been active, 
such  as  after  sleeping.  Similarly,  they  believed  that  the 
greater  amount  of  activity  during  the  day  or  immediately 
after exercising would lead to higher measurement values.  

In the questionnaire, 47% of participants both pre- and post-
study selected the afternoon (defined as 2-5pm) as the high-
est  BP  point  of  the  day.  Moreover,  there  was  an  increase 
from 18% to 38% of participants that selected the morning 
as the lowest BP point of the day. Their intuition seemed to 
influence  their  expectations  for  BP  despite  a  lack  of  evi-
dence in the recordings or in the literature supporting this. 
Within a typical sleep-wake cycle there are natural oscilla-
tions in BP levels—a rise in BP that begins before waking, 
peak BP in the late morning, and a drop in the early after-
noon [14]. P08 was also surprised by this trend at first, but 
then  she  recalled  an  article  about  women  who  have  heart 
attacks in the morning because “it has something to do with 
something rising in their bodies.” She was able to adjust her 
expectations with greater understanding of BP variability. 

Adjusting behavior to achieve desired BP 
Participants  also  described  how  they  learned  over  the 
course  of  the  study  factors  that  might  influence  their  BP 
level and then altered their behavior to achieve a desired BP 
target. P09 explained, “I would know that from what I had 
been  looking  at,  that  my  pressure  would  be  jacked  up  at 
certain  times,”  so  he  avoided  caffeine  and  took  his  BP  at 
times when he thought it would be lowest, “because I want 
to  see  my  overall  average  go  down”.  P09  framed  his  BP 

Measure 

Rank

Measured continuously by a cannula (small tube) 
that is inserted into an artery in the body. 

Average of measurements automatically recorded 
every hour for 24 hours by an auto-inflating device.

Average of self-measurements taken at home 3 
times a day for 3 days using an automated BP cuff.

Measured once by a doctor using a manually in-
flated cuff with a stethoscope. 

Measured once by a nurse using an automated 
blood pressure cuff. 

Self-measured once at home using an automated 
blood pressure cuff. 

Measured once at a kiosk machine with auto-
inflating cuff commonly found in drug stores. 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

Table 2. Participant ranking of the most trustworthy sources 
for measuring blood pressure at baseline. Order did not 
change when re-evaluated at the end of the study. 

monitoring  as  a  competition  that  he  wanted  to  win.  Other 
participants  used  their  observations  of  BP  variability  and 
avoided stressful settings that they linked to elevated pres-
sure, reduced their caffeine intake, and made other changes 
to their behavior to affect measurements. 

Correlating BP with daily living 
Using  structured  fields  in  the  web  application,  we  asked 
participants to mark if they exercised, felt stressed, or drank 
caffeine  in  the  hour  prior  to  each  measurement.  At  least  1 
out of 8 recordings was linked to one of these three varia-
bles (Table 3). In the free-text log notes, participants made 
connections with other aspects of their lives including emo-
tion,  food  intake,  and  physical  state.  These  same  themes 
appeared  throughout  the  interviews  as  well,  suggesting  a 
desire to relate daily activities with their BP levels.  

Descriptor 

Count  % 

Structured from 
web app 

Total log      
entries=2,181 

Author coded 
from participant 
comments in 
web app 

Total          
comments=1,225 

Caffeine 
Stress 

Exercise 

Context: activities 
Context: part of day 
Context: location 
Intake (food, drink) 
Commentary on BP 
Emotional State 
Physical State 

353  16 
291  13 

279  13 

549  45 
340  28 
99 
8 
209  17 
180  15 
9 
106 
6 
72 

Table 3. Participant descriptors for BP measurements. Caf-
feine, Stress, and Exercise were structured options; other 
themes were coded from comments in log entries, where there 
were multiple descriptors possible for a given entry. 

DIY Healthcare: Apps & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1683 
BP’s relationship to patterns of everyday living 
The most common annotation (45% of all comments) from 
participants  was  to  provide  context  about  a  recent  or  up-
coming activity, the part of the day (e.g. bedtime), and their 
location when they captured their BP. Participants reported 
taking  measurements  in  a  wide  variety  of  settings  outside 
the home including in vehicles and in public spaces. How-
ever, having a routine setting, “was probably the most rele-
vant to me because it was the most controlled environment. 
Same time of the day, I’m doing the same type of work. I’m 
interacting with the same type of people... It’s so more rele-
vant to me to see during that time because I think more fac-
tors are controlled” (P07). Participants described work and 
home as stable places through which to capture a meaning-
ful set of measurements. Participants also explained how a 
change  in  pattern,  “shows  that  our  weekends  are  totally 
different  than  the  weekdays.  I  guess  keeping  that  in  mind, 
I’m  not  too  surprised  but  it  is  surprising  that  the  blood 
pressure  is  so  sensitive  to  I  guess  routine  versus  whatever 
ad hoc thing we’re doing” (P01). Throughout the logs and 
interviews,  participants  stated  that  their  BP  data  heavily 
reflected their recent activities and routines. 

BP’s relationship to food and drink 
Food  and  meals  were  an  important  contextual  factor  that 
participants associated with BP, despite the fact that there is 
no  clear  evidence  supporting  this  type  of  acute  effect.  Be-
yond having caffeine, 17% of the notes included comments 
about other forms  of  consumption,  including recent  meals, 
alcohol, and cigarettes. Further reflecting this belief, partic-
ipants responded in the questionnaire about whether differ-
ent scenarios would lead to an acute increase, decrease, or 
no  change  in  an  average  person’s  BP.  More  than  75%  of 
participants at baseline and 85% post-study believed a high-
sodium  meal  would  increase  BP.  Though  popular  discus-
sion  about  the  link  between  sodium  and  heart  disease  is  a 
possible reason for participants’ focus on meals, they felt it 
added  relevance  and  meaning  to  highlight  instances  where 
they either consumed food or drink or had missed a meal. 

BP’s relationship to emotional and physical states 
In the interviews, participants rationalized a given BP read-
ing based on whether they were feeling stressed, anxious, or 
unwell  at  the  time.  P13  mentioned  how,  “Stress  is  a  big 
thing  and  I  know  that  that  definitely  raises  blood  pressure 
because when I feel stressed and I take it, it’s up.” Partici-
pants  marked  13%  of  their  entries  as  feeling  stressed.  In 
addition, noting physical states, such as feeling tired or un-
well, was another way for participants to give more context 
to BP readings. Ultimately, our study cohort expressed how 
a  given  BP value  helped  them  realize  how  their  emotional 
or physical state was affecting them. Seeing their BP meas-
urement brought attention to, “my surroundings, my intake, 
my stress intake and wanting to know more about that and 
what the triggers are, and how to stop those” (P27). Moni-
toring  provided  a  reflection  of  their  current  state  and  vali-
dated periods where they felt stress or excitement. 

Hypotheses and experiments to understand BP 
The  process  of  incorporating  more  contextual  data  along-
side the BP measurements helped participants to triangulate 
possible  causes  for  the  fluctuations.  Fifteen  percent  of  the 
log entries included comments about participants’ reactions 
to  a  particular reading  where  they  often  provided  explana-
tions  for  why  they  recorded  a  particular  BP  value.  After 
getting  an  unusual  reading,  P33  explained, “I  am  wonder-
ing if it was the shirt fabric I had on. I will experiment with 
that  tomorrow.”  In  response  to  confusion  or  questions 
about  a  given  reading,  participants  began  to  hypothesize 
and  test  out  how  their  BP  behaved  in  relation  to  a  certain 
activity or aspect of their lives. P27, for example, expressed 
a desire to set up an experiment where, “One day for lunch, 
I would eat a whole bunch of pizza and take it and the next I 
would eat salad, and see if that was different, and it would 
make  you  feel  good  if  you  could  see  a  big  change  in  it.” 
Participants would take their BP before and after climbing 
stairs, after coming out of a meeting, or in other contexts to 
see how the activities affected their BP. 

Impact on Perceptions of Well-being 
BP is a widely used health indicator for clinic diagnosis and 
treatment.  Accordingly,  participants  framed  their  experi-
ence of measuring BP in relation to health and well-being.  

Classifying blood pressure risk 
Although  participants  had  heard  of  hypertension,  pre-
hypertension, and normal BP prior to this study, most were 
not  able  to  correctly  identify  the  corresponding  numerical 
thresholds  of  these  categories  when  asked  in  the  question-
naire. At baseline, 35% and 26% of participants selected the 
correct  thresholds  of  hypertension  and  normal  BP  respec-
tively. We observed an increase to 44% correctly answered 
for hypertension (p=0.366) and 53% correctly answered for 
normal BP (p=0.020) by the end of the study. 

We also asked participants to self-describe their BP as nor-
mal,  pre-hypertensive,  or  hypertensive  (Figure  4).  Prior  to 
the  study  almost  all  participants  (91%)  self-identified  as 
having normal BP and only one participant stated they were 
pre-hypertensive.  However,  after  the  study,  24%  and  6% 
classified themselves as pre-hypertensive and hypertensive, 
respectively (p=0.003). This change is corroborated by the 
calculated  average  of  all  sitting  measurements  that  partici-
pants recorded in their BP logs. Using clinic-based thresh-
olds  for  classification,  62%  had  normal  BP  and 38% were 

Figure 4. Participants’ self-reported classification as either 
normal, pre-hypertensive, or hypertensive (pre/post), and 
calculated classification of measurements taken while sitting.

DIY Healthcare: Apps & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1684pre-hypertensive  or  hypertensive.  The  reason  for  this 
change  pre-  to  post-study  is  unclear,  but  factors  such  as 
enhanced  knowledge  of  BP  definitions,  greater  awareness 
of  their  typical  BP,  or  possibly  increased  anxiety  from  the 
readings could have affected participants’ classification.  

“You get like an emotional attachment to the thing… it’s a 
little  buddy  because  it’s  with  you  and  so  it  feels  like  it’s 
protecting  you,  that  might  sound  so  funny”  (P09).  Partici-
pants’ framing and association with the BP data and devices 
influenced their emotional experience.  

Defining BP beyond “clinical” normal 
The  change  in  how  participants  perceived  their  BP-related 
risk  reflects  a  larger  interest  among  participants  in  under-
standing  how  their  BP  compared  to  others.  During  the  in-
terviews, participants made comparisons to friends, family, 
or other groups. They expressed a desire to know, “is what 
I’m  seeing  typical  from  other  people?  That  was  what  I’m 
just  trying  to  figure  out”  (P30).  How  participants  defined 
normal varied. Some simply wanted to know whether they 
were  “healthy”.  However,  many  wanted  to  compare  their 
measurements  to  individuals  that  were  in  a  similar  age 
group,  the  same  gender,  and  a  similar  lifestyle  in  terms  of 
physical  activity,  smoking,  and  diet.  This  discussion  also 
led several of the participants to hypothesize that compari-
sons to others that are younger or healthier might be an ef-
fective way to stay motivated around health goals: 

“So I would like to see not only for my age group because 
I think the medical community tends to have lower expec-
tations as we age…I want to compare to younger people 
not—it’s  the  whole  thing  why  people  think,  ‘Oh,  we’re 
older so it’s okay to have 25 lbs. on.’ No it’s not.” (P08) 

Challenges to BP use in everyday contexts 
Prior  work  has  revealed  measurement  and  interpretation 
challenges with using BP devices [12,13], however, partici-
pants  in  this  study  also  discussed  the  emotional  impact  of 
measurement, concerns about the stigma of using a BP de-
vice, and their interest in continuing to measure their BP. 

Emotional impact and reactions to BP readings 
When the participants measured their BP, the health impli-
cations associated with blood pressure would create strong 
positive and negative emotional reactions. As P27 explains, 
“I  think  subconsciously  even  looking  at  it,  I  would  get  a 
little  stressed  or  kind  of  little  anxious  because  I  would  be 
scared it would be really high again.” P10 commented how 
the process of the cuff inflating was “anxiety-inducing” as 
it  cut  off  circulation  in  his  arm.  Feelings  of  apprehension 
about  future  measurements  or  the  discomfort  of  using  the 
device put off some participants. Others that had an atypical 
measurement described feeling panicked and obsessed, tak-
ing repeated measurements well beyond the 5 requested per 
day in order to make sure the readings were correct.  

Conversely, participants had positive reactions to their data 
when  they  focused  less  on  individual  readings.  For  exam-
ple, after seeing a graphic visual of his data, P10 explained 
that, “Once I thought I was in the norm I was like, ‘Yeah, 
I’m  good,  nothing  to  worry  about,’  and  then  I  just  go  on 
with my life.” Another participant actually felt more secure 
over  time  while  taking  measurements  at  home  because, 

Associations of BP with illness 
Framing  is  important,  as  participants  described  challenges 
with using the device in an open setting. They felt uncom-
fortable  with  how  others  would  perceive  them  and  were 
concerned about how the device attracted attention and was 
disruptive to others. Participants described instances where 
co-workers, friends, or family expressed concern or asked if 
they were unwell because they were capturing their BP.  

“This  isn’t  exactly  a  device that  you  go  for  and buy  it—
you  relate  this  to  sickness.  So  you  try  to  avoid  those  de-
vices…The design, it does not attract me and it’s an aisle 
that  I  just  try  to  avoid.  It’s  something  with  health  is-
sues…You  never  relate  this  design  to  I  just  want  to  be 
healthy  and  I  want  to  keep  it  there.  Versus  the  [fitness] 
watch,  when  I  keep  it  there,  I  want  to  be  healthy  and  I 
want to track it. The design helps to inspire you.” (P26) 

P26’s  experience  reflects  a  current  challenge  with  existing 
perceptions of BP. The stigma of its association with having 
a disease or being unwell was a concern across participants. 

Continued use of BP device 
During  the  interviews,  participants  commented  on  their 
motivation to continue using the device after the study end-
ed.  Regularly  monitoring  BP  helped  some  to  “understand 
the readings better. That it does fluctuate. And one reading 
at the doctor once a year is not going to tell the whole sto-
ry.  Which  I  thought  it  did.  I  really  thought  that’s  all  you 
needed”  (P31).  Not  everyone  identified  immediate  value 
from using the BP device, however. P10 expressed a desire 
for additional context to add value or significance to the BP 
results.  He  preferred  that,  “if  the  program  could  be  de-
signed  that  was  like—you  just  had  this  amount  of  calories 
or this kind of food and you’ll see this bump in your blood 
pressure. Yeah, maybe I would be more intrigued to keep up 
with that kind of data and learn.”  

At  the  study  end,  seventeen  participants  stated  that  they 
would  continue  to  measure  their  BP  at  least  once  per  day. 
Another thirteen mentioned an interest in capturing their BP 
periodically, such as, “one to two times a month just to see. 
That’s about it. And I think that would be sufficient just to 
kind of—and I would do my three [measurements]—get my 
average because I think that that’s important” (P34). Four 
mentioned they were unlikely to continue measuring it reg-
ularly,  “because  I  know  I’m  more  or  less  in  the  healthy 
range—I mean yes I do go into the 120's, but whatever—so 
I wasn't as concerned about it” (P30).  

We  also  followed  up  with  participants  60  days  after  the 
study to assess their continued use. Twenty-six (76%) of the 
participants responded. Even though several people contin-

DIY Healthcare: Apps & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1685ued  to  measure  their  BP  at  least  once  a  week,  most  re-
spondents  reported  less  frequent  measurement  than  during 
their final interview (Table 4). 

DISCUSSION 
Based  on  the  experiences  of  our  participants,  there  is  an 
opportunity for redesigning future BP devices for a general 
audience that addresses issues of stigma, measurement vari-
ability,  and  the  lack  of  meaningful,  actionable,  feedback 
with current devices. The themes discussed in the previous 
section  are  especially  relevant  as  we  shift  from  ad  hoc  BP 
measurements  in  the  clinic  to  more  frequent  measurement 
at home by consumers seeking to track and understand gen-
eral well-being based on their data. Our participant experi-
ences demonstrated that a BP value means little in isolation.  

For our participants with limited knowledge of BP, the var-
iation  that  they  experienced  influenced  their  attitudes  and 
understanding of blood pressure. In some cases their intui-
tion  of  BP  during  the  mornings  or  after  exercise  broke 
down.  In  other  cases,  participants  associated  BP  with  mo-
ments  of  stress  or  factors  related  to  their  environment.  In-
creased  interaction  with  their  BP  led  many  participants  to 
alter their behavior, experiment with how their BP respond-
ed  to  stimuli,  and  reflected  a  desire  for  greater  knowledge 
of how BP links with different aspects of their lives. 

Importantly,  measuring  BP  and  experiencing  variation  had 
an emotional impact on many participants. Observing unu-
sual  values  caused  confusion,  frustration,  and  anxiety  that 
influenced  their  interest  in  using  the  BP  device.  They  dis-
cussed their use in terms of normative social influences that 
aligns with the findings in the autoethnography reported by 
O’Kane et al. [25]. Participants expressed a desire to situate 
their BP relative to others—to motivate change or establish 
a sense of what is normal BP and normal variation. Howev-
er,  some  participants  started  to  measure  their  BP  well  be-
yond the study requirements after becoming concerned with 
a particular elevated reading. This contributed to feelings of 
stress  and  may  have  led  to  even  more  elevated  readings. 
Because  measuring  BP  has  such  strong  connotations  with 
illness,  devices  designed  for  personal  use  should  consider 
how this metric will be accepted and interpreted—both pos-
itively and negatively—as it becomes more pervasive.  

Envisioning future BP devices for personal use 
Many  participants  expressed  an  interest  in  regular  meas-
urements to ascertain their BP and gain an intuitive under-
standing  of  BP  variability  through  introspection.  Others 
wanted to explicitly test the acute impact of certain activi-
ties on their BP. To support this need, we envision an unob-
trusive,  wearable  BP  device  that  can  capture  BP  as  a  dy-
namic  variable  throughout  the  day.  This  type  of  device 
should link with other data such as stress measures and food 
logs that many of the participants highlighted as relevant to 
their  BP  variation.  We  also  know  that  the  relationship  be-
tween  BP  and  risk  of  cardiovascular  disease  is  continuous 
and  short-term  changes  can  be  meaningful  indicators  of 

Post-Study Use 
More than once/week 
Once/week 
Once/month 
Haven’t used device 
No response 

Count 
4 
4 
9 
9 
8 

% 
12 
12 
26 
26 
24 

Table 4. Follow-up survey of average self-reported measure-
ment frequency 60 days after the end of the study. 

health  risk.  Capturing  these  changes  in  real-time  can  pro-
vide immediate feedback to users regarding trends and help 
them to reflect, review, and engage with their BP data. 

Other  participants  described  the  value  of  BP  measurement 
in terms of a periodic check-up, such as monitoring for pre-
eclampsia for a short duration of time. As an alternative to a 
device built  for  continuous monitoring, we  envision  a  sys-
tem that reimagines the pharmacy BP kiosk. However, un-
like  a  kiosk,  our  participants  did  not  want  a  snapshot  of 
their  BP  at  a  single  point  in  time,  but  preferred  a  way  to 
temporarily capture their BP for a period of time—such as 
monitoring several days to capture an average and evaluate 
longitudinal  trends.  They  also  did  not  want  to  manage  or 
find a place for a cumbersome, infrequently used device in 
the home, nor have to go to a fixed location like a pharma-
cy.  The  users  of  this  new  system  do  not  need  to  monitor 
their  BP  every  day,  but  are  interested  in  a  momentary,  re-
peated  measure  assessment  that  reports  their  health  status 
and  how  they  compare  to  others.  They  prefer  measuring 
their BP in an environment that is convenient and comfort-
able using a system that is either disposable or can be inte-
grated unobtrusively into their home environment. 

Design recommendations 
Even though our participants strongly desired to track their 
BP at home,  they were dissatisfied with the capabilities  of 
typical home devices. Here, we consider the implications of 
short-term fluctuations and an audience new to BP monitor-
ing. We suggest several design considerations that can im-
prove  the  relevance,  actionable  value,  emotional  impact, 
and intelligibility of BP data captured for generalized use. 

Making BP data relevant and context-sensitive 
The  importance  of  situating  BP  in  context  is  evident  with 
the  variety  of  environmental  and  situational  variables  that 
participants  highlighted  in  the  study.  Participants  did  not 
discuss their BP values independently, but often connected 
readings with their workplace, stress, food and drink, exer-
cise, or other activities. Bentley and other researchers have 
argued  that  for  longer-term  personal  monitoring,  a  multi-
faceted, holistic  outlook  on what  to  track can  enable  more 
nuanced  and  personalized  feedback  from  sensor  data  [2]. 
BP devices should have greater integration with sensors that 
detect  location,  movement,  stress,  and  other  physical  met-
rics  to  help  individuals  understand  changes  in  blood  pres-
sure in relation to relevant aspects of their lives.  

DIY Healthcare: Apps & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1686Participants  also  described  adding  context  to  BP  data  by 
comparing  their  numbers  to  other  groups  to  get  a  sense  of 
what is “normal”. This desire for having a certain BP status 
is a clear opportunity to leverage crowd-sourcing to provide 
an individual with an understanding of their data relative to 
others  with  similar  age,  gender,  or  lifestyle.  Participants 
also wanted to compare to others’ BP in order to set goals 
for  self-improvement.  Based  on  data  from  younger  or 
healthier  users,  devices  could  even  infer  and  recommend 
activities and lifestyle changes that would help users attain 
health goals. Having  a personalized  history  of  BP  changes 
in  combination  with  other  persons’  data  can  provide  users 
with valuable trajectories for predicting health risks [1] and 
help motivate behavior changes in a person’s life. 

Making BP data meaningful and actionable 
The manner in which BP data is presented seemed to have a 
large  impact  on  participants’  interpretations  and  perceived 
value.  The  typical  device’s  display  of  a  snapshot  of  SBP, 
DBP,  and pulse  values provides  little  sense  of  the  form  or 
shape of their blood pressure over time. In cases of strong 
variation  this  may  have  hindered  pattern  recognition,  and 
participants’  prior  experience  influenced  their  assumptions 
and expectations. For example, many participants expected 
their lowest BP reading in the morning and were often con-
fused  by  the  rise  and  fall  of  BP  throughout  the  day.  The 
participants  also  cited  the  order  that  the  numbers  are  pre-
sented and their relative magnitude as why they focused on 
SBP  or  DBP.  Recognizing  these  situations  where  expecta-
tions  break  down  or  when  the  data  display  directs  user  at-
tention  provides  an  opportunity  to  focus  design  to  educate 
users about meaningful BP variability and trends. 

Blood  pressure  devices  can  also  move  beyond  supporting 
reflection  toward  providing  actionable  information.  Sys-
tems  should  flexibly  handle  diverse  representations  of  BP 
data  such  as  binary  (healthy  or  not),  categorical  (health 
risk),  ordinal  (population  comparisons),  or  continuous 
(trends,  correlations  with  everyday  living)  to  not  only  an-
swer  user  queries  but  support  active  decision-making 
aligned  with  personal  goals.  A  continuous  monitoring  tool 
that  can  recognize  patterns,  learn  baselines,  and  identify 
meaningful  trends  can  support  real-time  decisions  through 
contextually aware feedback. Instead of placing a burden on 
the user or a third party to analyze a large, complex dataset, 
the  device  can  produce  an  appropriate  data  representation 
that helps evaluate actions relative to changes in BP. 

Making BP data desirable 
Even  though  participants  expressed  interest  in  evaluating 
correlations between their current mental state and their BP, 
atypical  BP  readings  among  some  participants  increased 
their  anxiety  in  a  manner  similar  to  the  white  coat  effect 
observed  in  clinics.  The  way  that  individuals  perceive  BP 
devices and how BP results are communicated to them can 
affect this type of emotional response. We suggest that fu-
ture designs frame BP data in terms of averages and ranges 

to reflect measurement uncertainty and mitigate the psycho-
logical  impact  of  a  single  high  reading.  Framing  measure-
ments  this  way  also  offers  an  opportunity  to  incorporate 
better  visual  displays  that  emphasize  patterns,  trends,  and 
deviations from the mean rather than single-point measures. 

Making BP data trustworthy and intelligible 
Most  home  BP  devices,  including  the  one  used  in  this 
study, will provide a clinical stratification of BP based on a 
single  measurement.  Yet  within  person  variation,  environ-
mental  stimuli,  and  device  inaccuracy  create  significant 
measurement  variability [10]. Even clinical guidelines rec-
ommend  incorporating  additional  factors  such  as  co-
morbidities and lifestyle behaviors in order to classify car-
diovascular risk [19]. A single reading provides a mislead-
ing understanding of an individual’s BP. In a home setting, 
participants  have  the  ability  to  capture  regular  measure-
ments  of  their  BP.  Therefore,  classification  of  a  person’s 
health status may be more relevant and representative as an 
average or visualization of BP trends. Devices could begin 
with  typical  variance  as  ascertained  from  other  users  or 
based  on  existing  literature  and  slowly  personalize  this  to 
the individual, emphasizing their BP as a range. The devic-
es can also improve their intelligibility by providing an in-
dication of confidence in a given reading depending on fac-
tors such as deviation from an average BP or awareness of 
the possible influence of environmental variables. 

Limitations 
Because  our  study  was  primarily  qualitative,  and  because 
our participant sample skewed slightly towards a physically 
active and educated demographic, we caution against over-
generalizing  our  findings.  Moreover,  although  participants 
were exposed to their BP repeatedly during the study peri-
od, a two-week interval might be inadequate to fully reflect 
and  understand  their  blood  pressure.  However,  we  believe 
the  open  log  entries  and  the  multiple  interviews  provide 
insight into how non-hypertensive individuals begin to un-
derstand and relate to BP as a personal health metric. This 
type  of  real-time  in  situ  data  capture  is  a  well-recognized 
approach to understanding ubiquitous technologies [6].  

CONCLUSION 
BP  is  a  valuable  metric  to  incorporate  as  part  of  personal 
informatics  systems  for  health.  We  identified  self-tracking 
needs  including  responding  to  BP  variability  through  re-
peated  or  continuous  measures  and  supporting  personal 
discovery of BP fluctuations linked to everyday living. Re-
framing BP devices away from disease management toward 
well-being can help reduce the stigma and emotional anxie-
ty  associated  with  BP  and  stimulate  greater  adoption  and 
use  of  these  devices.  Future  designs  should  consider  more 
casual use contexts in addition to health maintenance. 

Through our analysis of participant experiences with track-
ing their BP, we illuminate how individuals collecting more 
frequent at-home BP measurements perceive BP variability 

DIY Healthcare: Apps & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1687and  make  associations  with  activities  and  aspects  of  daily 
living.  We  also  demonstrate  the  impact  and  relevance  that 
measurement  of  BP  had  on  a  young,  healthy  population. 
Finally,  we  discuss  opportunities  to  improve  the  design  of 
BP  devices  through  better  support  of  individual  reflection, 
diverse data representations, transparency around BP varia-
bility, and integration with other sensor data. Many BP de-
vices currently on the market are still designed for clinical 
needs  and  uses.  The  shift  towards  sensor-based  personal 
health  monitoring  provides  an  opportunity  to  innovate  on 
this  metric  and  make  blood  pressure  measurement  more 
accessible and relevant to a broader audience. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Allen, N.B., Siddique, J., Wilkins, J.T., et al. Blood pres-
sure trajectories in early adulthood and subclinical athero-
sclerosis in middle age. JAMA 311, 5 (2014), 490–7. 

2.  Bentley, F., Tollmar, K., Stephenson, P., et al. Health 

Mashups: Presenting Statistical Patterns between Wellbe-
ing Data and Context in Natural Language to Promote Be-
havior Change. ACM TOCHI 20, 5 (2013), 1–27. 

3.  Cheng, S., Lichtman, J.H., Amatruda, J.M., et al. 

Knowledge of blood pressure levels and targets in patients 
with coronary artery disease in the USA. Journal of human 
hypertension 19, 10 (2005), 769–74. 

4.  Choe, E.K., Lee, N.B., Lee, B., Pratt, W., Kientz, J.A. Un-
derstanding quantified-selfers’ practices in collecting and 
exploring personal data. Proc CHI 2014, ACM Press 
(2014), 1143–1152. 

5.  Clemensen, J., Craggs, M., Marcussen, C., et al. Chroni-
cally Ill Citizens and Home Monitoring: “Nothing to talk 
about ”!. eTELEMED 2013, (2013), 47–52. 

6.  Consolvo, S., Harrison, B., Smith, I., et al. Conducting In 
Situ Evaluations for and With Ubiquitous Computing 
Technologies. International Journal of Human-Computer 
Interaction 22, 1-2 (2007), 103–118. 

7.  Cuckson, A.C., Reinders, A., Shabeeh, H., Shennan, A.H. 
Validation of the Microlife BP 3BTO-A oscillometric 
blood pressure monitoring device according to a modified 
British Hypertension Society protocol. Blood pressure 
monitoring 7, 6 (2002), 319–24. 

8.  Epstein, D., Cordeiro, F., Bales, E., Fogarty, J., Munson, S. 
Taming data complexity in lifelogs. Proc DIS 2014, ACM 
Press (2014), 667–676. 

9.  Fox, S., Duggan, M. Tracking for Health. Pew Internet & 

American Life Project, Washington, DC, 2013. 

10. Gerin, W., Schwartz, A.R., Schwartz, J.E., et al. Limita-
tions of current validation protocols for home blood pres-
sure monitors for individual patients. Blood pressure 
monitoring 7, 6 (2002), 313–8. 

11. Go, A.S., Mozaffarian, D., Roger, V.L., et al. Heart disease 
and stroke statistics-2013 update: a report from the Ameri-
can Heart Association. Circulation 127, 1 (2013), e6–e245. 

12. Grönvall, E., Verdezoto, N. Understanding challenges and 
opportunities of preventive blood pressure self-monitoring 
at home. Proc ECCE 2013, ACM Press (2013), 1. 

13. Grönvall, E., Verdezoto, N. Beyond self-monitoring. Proc 

UbiComp 2013, ACM Press (2013), 587. 

14. Hermida, R.C., Ayala, D.E., Portaluppi, F. Circadian var-
iation of blood pressure: the basis for the chronotherapy of 
hypertension. Advanced drug delivery reviews 59, 9-10 
(2007), 904–22. 

15. Kay, M., Morris, D., Schraefel, M., Kientz, J.A. There’s no 
such thing as gaining a pound. Proc Ubicomp 2013, ACM 
Press (2013), 401. 

16. Le, V.-V., Mitiku, T., Sungar, G., Myers, J., Froelicher, V. 
The blood pressure response to dynamic exercise testing: a 
systematic review. Progress in cardiovascular diseases 51, 
2 (2008), 135–60. 

17. Li, I., Dey, A.K., Forlizzi, J. Understanding my data, my-
self. Proc Ubicomp 2011, ACM Press (2011), 405. 

18. Lim, B.Y., Dey, A.K. Investigating intelligibility for un-
certain context-aware applications. Proc Ubicomp 2011, 
ACM Press (2011), 415. 

19. Mancia, G., Fagard, R., Narkiewicz, K., et al. 2013 

ESH/ESC Guidelines for the management of arterial hy-
pertension. European heart jrnl 34, 28 (2013), 2159–219. 

20. Mancia, G. Short- and long-term blood pressure variabil-
ity: present and future. Hypertension 60, 2 (2012), 512–7. 

21. Mort, J.R., Kruse, H.R. Timing of blood pressure meas-

urement related to caffeine consumption. Annals Pharma-
cotherapy 42, 1 (2008), 105–10. 

22. Nair, D., Tan, S.-Y., Gan, H.-W., et al. The use of ambula-
tory tonometric radial arterial wave capture to measure 
ambulatory blood pressure: the validation of a novel wrist-
bound device in adults. Journal of human hypertension 22, 
3 (2008), 220–2. 

23. National Center for Health Statistics. Percent Distribution 
of Number of Visits to Health Care Professionals by Se-
lected Characteristics: 2000 and 2009. Statistical Abstract 
of the U.S.: 2010, 2010. 

24. Niiranen, T.J., Hänninen, M.-R., Johansson, J., et al. 

Home-measured blood pressure is a stronger predictor of 
cardiovascular risk than office blood pressure: the Finn-
Home study. Hypertension 55, 6 (2010), 1346–51. 

25. O’Kane, A.A., Rogers, Y., Blandford, A.E. Gaining empa-
thy for non-routine mobile device use through autoethnog-
raphy. Proc ACM CHI ’14, ACM Press (2014), 987–990. 

26. Pickering, T.G., White, W.B., Giles, T.D., et al. When and 
how to use self (home) and ambulatory blood pressure 
monitoring. J Am Soc Hypertens 4, 2 (2010), 56–61. 

27. Rothwell, P.M. Limitations of the usual blood-pressure 
hypothesis and importance of variability, instability, and 
episodic hypertension. Lancet 375, 9718 (2010), 938–48.  

DIY Healthcare: Apps & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1688 
