Charting Design Preferences on Wellness Wearables  

Juho Rantakari1, Virve Inget2, Ashley Colley1, Jonna Häkkilä1 

1University of Lapland 
Yliopistokatu 8 
96400 Rovaniemi, Finland 
firstname.lastname@ulapland.fi 

2Center for Ubiquitous Computing 
P.O Box 4500 
90014 University of Oulu, Finland 
firstname.lastname@oulu.fi 

ABSTRACT 
This paper presents a study on people’s preferences with wearable 
wellness  devices.  The  results  are  based  on  an  online  survey 
(n=84),  where  people  assessed  different  features  in  wearable 
wellness devices. Our salient findings show that the highest rated 
features were the comfort of wearing the device and long battery 
lifetime.  Altogether,  factors  related  to  the  form  factor  and 
industrial  design  were  emphasized,  whereas  social  sharing 
features attracted surprisingly little attention.   

CCS Concepts 
• Human-centered computing - Empirical studies in HCI.  

Keywords 
Wellness; wearable computing; user studies; design. 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
Even though wearable computing is largely still taking baby steps 
as consumer products, it has already emerged to mass markets in 
some  forms, one of these areas being wearable wellness devices. 
in 
Different  user  groups  ranging  from  people 
quantified-self  data  [3]  to  ordinary  weight-watchers  are  using 
various wellness devices to track their sports performance as well 
as their everyday wellness data. The design of wearable wellness 
devices has evolved  from combinations of a heart rate chest belt 
and a smartwatch towards embedded and more sophisticated form 
factors,  such  as  sensors  integrated  to  shoes,  as  in  the  Nike+  or 
bracelets  such  as  Fitbit.  An  overview  of  different  possible  form 
factors available today for wearable wellness devices is illustrated 
in figure 1. 

interested 

Earlier research has especially addressed mobile phones as a tool 
for  supporting  wellness  and  physical  exercise.  Tacking  outdoor 
sports  with  a  mobile  phone’s  integrated  sensors  has  been  found 
convenient, e.g., as users state that they carry the phone with them 
anyway  [1].  Also  playful  design  is  often  utilized  [4].  Whereas 
research has introduced general guidelines for designing wellness 
technologies  [5],  we  focus  on  perceptions  of  wearable  wellness 
devices. Especially, we are interested in industrial design aspects, 
which  has  so  far  been  an  under-explored  area.  Our  findings  are 
based  on  an  online  survey,  where  people  assessed  and  ranked 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting  with credit  is permitted. To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
AH 2016, February 25-27, 2016, Geneva, Switzerland 
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3680-2/16/02…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2875194.2875231 

different  design  features  for  wellness  applications.  Similar 
methodology  has  been  used  to  chart  people’s  preferences  for 
jewelry type wearable computing [6]. 

Figure 1. Illustration of various different wearable wellness 
device form factors 

2.  DATA COLLECTION 
2.1  Online Survey 
To evaluate and define users’ requirements for wearable wellness 
devices  we  implemented  an  online  survey.  The  survey  was 
designed  in  a  Web-based  survey  tool  and  was  open  for  answers 
for a period of six  weeks  from early  August to September 2015. 
The survey was distributed at two university campuses in different 
cities,  via  social  media,  and  through  a  citizen  participation  Web 
portal  hosted  by  the  city.  Our  core  target  group  for  study 
participants was young adults either studying or working, because 
we  considered  them  as  being  interested  in  their  personal  health 
and  already  used 
to  using  different  gadgets  and  mobile 
applications. 

2.2  Survey Design 
The survey had a total of 10 questions, and took 10-15 minutes to 
complete.  First,  demographic 
regarding  age, 
occupation and location was asked, as well as current experiences 
with  wearable  wellness  devices  and  opinions  on  their  usage.  We 
asked the participants whether they own a wearable device and, if 
so, do they still use it and how has the usage changed over time. 

information 

In the second part of the survey we asked the users to rate various 
features  and  aspects  of  wearable  health  devices  by  distributing 
100  points  between  22  different  requirements  for  wearable 
wellness  devices.  The  requirements  are  listed  in  table  1.  The 
number of points awarded to various features gave us insight into 
what  people  consider  as  being  the  most  important  aspects  in  the 
design of wearable wellness devices. 

 
 
 
 
Table 1. Requirements for wearable health devices in the 
survey. 

Form factor 

FF1 

FF2 

FF3 

FF4 

FF5 

The device looks good 

The device is small 

The device is lightweight 

The device is tough 

The device is comfortable to wear 

Functionality 

FU6 

FU7 

The device battery lasts for at least 24 hours 

The  device  offers  several  functions  e.g.  feedback 
on physical activity and heart rate monitoring 

Body location 

BL8 

BL9 

The  device  can  be  worn  somewhere  else  than  the 
wrist 

The device can be worn on the wrist 

Customizability 

CU10 

I can change the device’s appearance 

CU11 

I can configure how the information is presented on 
the device’s screen 

Interaction design 

ID12 

ID13 

The device can be operated unobtrusively 

I can operate it quickly and with little effort 

Context-awareness 

CA14 

CA15 

CA16 

The  display  adapts 
to  my  environment,  e.g. 
brightness  of  the  light  display  adapts  to  lighting 
conditions 

The  display  adapts  to  my  situation,  e.g.  display  is 
deactivated  while  driving;  light  display  is  dimmed 
during a meeting 

The  device  automatically  recognizes  my  activity 
type and I don't have to set it to do so 

Feedback and sharing 

FS17 

FS18 

FS19 

The  device  gives  instant  feedback  based  on  my 
performance during exercise or activity 

The  device  gives  detailed 
performance during exercise or activity 

feedback  on  my 

Without  further  knowledge,  people  nearby  cannot 
understand 
the  displayed 
information from the device 

the  meaning  of 

FS20 

I can easily share the results with other people 

FS21 

FS22 

I  can  easily  compare  my  performance  to  other 
people's performances 

I  can  compare  my  performance  to  my  previous 
performances 

2.3  Participants 
We  received  altogether  123  responses  to  the  survey,  however, 
only 84 answered all the questions as instructed. In the following, 
the  results  are  reported  based  the  sample  size  that  answered  the 
individual questions. The demographics were as follows for the 84 

participants. Of these, 54 (64%) were female and 30 (36%) male. 
The average age of the participants was 29 years, ranging from 20 
to 61 years (SD = 9.8), and 90% of them came from Finland. 

3.  RESULTS 
In  the  first  section  we  detail  the  answers  from  the  questions 
regarding  the  participants’  use  of  wearable  wellness  devices  in 
their everyday life. In the second section we describe the results of 
the  survey  question  #9,  where  users  had  to  allocate  100  points 
between  different  features  of  wearable  wellness  devices.  In  the 
last section we make note of additional comments and information 
received from the participants during the study. 
3.1  Current Wearable Wellness Device Usage 
From  the  123  test  participants  26%  owned  at  least  one  wearable 
health device and 11% owned more than one. Of the people who 
owned  a  wearable  health  device,  46%  used  it  everyday,  13% 
every  week and 15% about once a month. A total of 27% of the 
participants  had  stopped  using  their  devices  altogether.  When 
asking  specifically  about  the  continuation  of  the  use  with 
device(s),  45%  of  the  participants  who  owned  the  devices 
continued  to  use  them,  29%  had  seen  their  usage  decrease  over 
time, and 30% of the participants who used their wearable devices 
had  stopped  using  them  completely  after  a  while.  The  slight 
incongruity  between  the  results  may  be  due  to  some  participants 
owning multiple devices. 

The main reason for stopping using the devices was that users felt 
that  they  did  not  get  relevant  feedback  from  the  devices  (53%).  
One participant commented that: “… It would give me "inactivity 
alerts"  when  I  was  driving  or  in  long  meetings,  which  felt  like  I 
was  being  punished  for  being  inactive  in  situations  I  could  not 
avoid” (#28, male, 26 years).  Also usability problems, mismatch 
with  context,  and  interoperability  issues  were  brought  up.  One 
participant commented on their stopped usage: “The device didn’t 
work  well  enough  with  my  other  devices  and  the  operation  took 
too much manual control through bad user interfaces, the device’s 
quality wasn’t tough and good enough.” (#33, male, 28 years) 

3.2  Overall Ratings of Requirements 
Figure  2  shows  the  overall  ratings  participants  gave  to  the  22 
different requirements. The results are aggregated total points for 
each  requirement  and  sorted  based  from  the  highest  to  lowest 
number of points. The most important features are, that the device 
battery lasts for at least 24 hours (FU6) and that the device should 
be comfortable to wear (FF5). The least prioritized features were, 
the ability to share results with other people (FS20) and the ability 
to  compare  your  performance  with  other  people’s  performances 
(FS21).  However,  social  aspects  and  sharing  came  up  in 
comments:  “People  want  to  share  their  information  on  social 
media at least during the initial phase of usage, especially young 
users.  After  it  evens  out  and  they  may  use  the  devices  more  to 
observe  their  health,  improve  it  and  gain  insight  into  it.”  (#71, 
male, 26 years). 

Overall, all requirements related to the form  factor (5 items) and 
functionality (2 items) were ranked in the top half, i.e. among the 
11  highest  prioritized  features  of  the  total  of  22.  Hence,  the 
industrial design aspects in the design requirements for  wearable 
wellness technologies were emphasized. Additionally, in the free 
text comments, the industrial design and form factor aspects also 
gained  attention,  e.g.:  “Intelligence  in  fabrics  and  clothing  and 
also in smartphones is interesting. The design in the device should 
be of really good quality. More jewel-like options.” (#52, female, 
51 years). 

Figure 2. Aggregated points of the 22 requirements sorted from the most to least important. Abbreviations of requirements are 
described Table 1. Bar colours indicate categories. 

Figure 3 shows the relative perceived importance for each of the 
total of six categories of requirements, gathered by tallying up the 
points for each category and divided by the requirements in each 
category.  The  figure  shows  that  overall  concern  when  regarding 
the  requirements  for  wearable  health  devices  was  given  to 
functionalities and form factor.  

In general it may be noted that female participants tended to give 
higher  scores  on  design  requirements  related  to  effortless  use  of 
the  device  (FU6,  ID13)  and  ‘self’  focused  aspects  –  privacy  and 
comparison  to  one’s  own  performance  (F19,  FS22).  Male 
participants  paid  more  attention  to  technical  aspects,  such  as  the 
configuration  of  the  device,  automatic  activity  recognition  and 
detailed feedback. 

Figure 3. Normalized aggregated points for the 7 categories. 
(Total points / number of requirements per category.) 

3.3  Gender Aspects 
Figure  4  presents  the  results  of  the  prioritized  features  separated 
by  gender.  The  design  requirements  are  presented  in  the  same 
order as in Figure 2, i.e. based on the cumulative total score. The 
scores  in  Figure  4  are  normalized,  by  dividing  the  cumulative 
score for each gender by the number of participants of that gender.  

To  identify  significant  differences  between  male  and  female 
participants’ views on each criterion, independent samples t-tests 
were  conducted.  Applying  a  significance  level  threshold  of  0.1, 
the  following  were  identified  as  significant.  Battery  lifetime  was 
significantly more important for women than men, p = .057 (FU6: 
The  device  battery  lasts  for  at  least  24  hours).  Sharing  and 
competitive  features  were  rated  significantly  higher  by  men  than 
women  (FS20  p  =  .0735  and  FS21  p  =  .0138).  In  particular,  for 
FS21  (FS21:I  can  easily  compare  my  performance  to  other 
people's  performances)  the  difference  between  genders  was 
significant at the p<0.05 level. 

Figure 4. Mean score for each feature, separated by gender. 
Error bars indicate standard error of mean. 

3.4  Other User Comments 
In  the  freeform  comment  section  at  the  end  of  the  survey, 
sustainability and green values were raised as an additional theme.  
Participants  wondered  about  the  ethical  and  ecological  issues 
related  to  the devices:  “…  the device  should  be as  recyclable  as 
possible  and  safe  to  the  users  and  the  surrounding  environment 
…” (#123, male, 22 years) and: “The ethics and ecological issues 
(of the products)? How do you dispose or get rid of the device?” 
(#111, male, 21 years).  

In addition, some participants commented on the technical aspects 
and  data  analyzing  capabilities  of  the  devices:  “The  current 
devices can’t refine good enough information from the measured 

 
 
 
 
 
 
data,  too  many  services  provide  just  measured  data  to  the  user 
and leave the interpretation to the user even though analyzing the 
data and making compilations of it should be the main focus of the 
companies”  (#47,  male,  27  years).  Moreover,  the  viewpoint  of 
multiple device ownership was  mentioned:  “[The device] should 
integrate itself into my device ecosystem” (#1, male, 30 years).  

- User Experience Perspective. In Proceedings of the 
European Conference on Ambient Intelligence (AmI '08), 
Emile Aarts, James L. Crowley, Boris Ruyter, Heinz 
Gerhäuser, Alexander Pflaum, Janina Schmidt, and Reiner 
Wichert (Eds.). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 192-
209. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-89617-3_13 

related 

requirements 

4.  DISCUSSION 
Interestingly,  design 
to  sharing  and 
comparing  results  received  a  surprisingly  small  amount  of 
attention were given a low priority. This is a somewhat surprising 
result  considering  the  earlier  research  on  wellness  technologies, 
which  has  emphasized  social  and  sharing  aspects,  e.g.  [2].  We 
speculate  that  one  reason  for  the  result  might  be  that  earlier 
research has focused much on utilizing mobile phones, a domain 
with  a  vast  number  of  wellness  applications  [7].  Mobile  phones 
are by nature regarded as social communication devices. It may be 
that,  in  users’  perception,  wearable  wellness  devices  relate  to 
other  types  technologies,  e.g.,  health  devices  such  as  blood 
pressure  monitors  or 
sharing  and 
communication  features  are  not  perceived  as  being  inherently  a 
part  of  them.  We  consider  this  finding  interesting,  as  it  suggests 
that user’s expectations and priorities with wearable devices may 
be different from those of phone-based wellness applications. 

step  counters,  and 

The priority given to features related to the form factor indicates 
that industrial design plays a major role in the appeal of wearable 
wellness  devices.    Based  on  the  results,  we  participants  wanted 
wearable  devices  to  be  lightweight,  comfortable,  durable,  and  to 
look  good.  Attention  to  industrial  design  also  changes  the 
emphasis  in  the  design  space  compared  to  mobile  phone  based 
apps,  where  graphical  UI  design  has  dominated.  The  top 
requirements,  i.e.  long  battery  life  and  comfort  of  wearing  the 
device,  show 
is  expected  and  highly 
appreciated.  

that  effortless  use 

Our  study  is  limited  by  its  method  (online  survey)  and  sample 
size.  For  instance,  observations  in  the  field  would  have  given 
deeper  insight  into  the  phenomenon  and  preferences.  Moreover, 
the majority of study participants did not own a wearable wellness 
gadget.  However,  we  believe  our  findings  are  interesting  for  the 
growing number of designers working on wellness technologies. 

5.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This  research  has  been  supported  by  a  grant  from  Tekes  –  the 
Finnish Funding Agency  for Innovation as part of Digital Health 
Revolution programme. 

6.  REFERENCES 
[1]  Ahtinen,A., Isomursu, M., Huhtala, Y., Kaasinen, J., 

Salminen, J., and Häkkilä, J. 2008. Tracking Outdoor Sports 

[2]  Anderson, I., Maitland, J., Sherwood, S., Barkhuus, L., 

Chalmers, M., Hall, M., Brown, B. and Muller, H. 2007. 
Shakra: tracking and sharing daily activity levels with 
unaugmented mobile phones. Mob. Netw. Appl. 12, 2-3 
(March 2007), 185-199. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11036-
007-0011-7 

[3]  Choe, E. K., Lee, N. B., Lee, B., Pratt, W. and Kientz, J. A. 

2014. Understanding quantified-selfers' practices in 
collecting and exploring personal data. In Proceedings of the 
32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in 
computing systems (CHI '14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
1143-1152. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2556288.2557372 

[4]  Consolvo, S., Klasnja, P., McDonald, D. W., Avrahami, D., 
Froehlich, J., LeGrand, L., Libby, R., Mosher, K. and 
Landay, J. A. 2008. Flowers or a robot army?: encouraging 
awareness & activity with personal, mobile displays. In 
Proceedings of the 10th international conference on 
Ubiquitous computing (UbiComp '08). ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, 54-63. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1409635.1409644 

[5]  Consolvo, S., Everitt, K., Smith, I. and Landay, J. A. 2006. 
Design requirements for technologies that encourage 
physical activity. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '06), Rebecca 
Grinter, Thomas Rodden, Paul Aoki, Ed Cutrell, Robin 
Jeffries, and Gary Olson (Eds.). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
457-466. http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1124772.1124840 

[6]  Fortmann, J., Heuten,W. and Boll, S. 2015. User 

requirements for digital jewellery. In Proceedings of the 
2015 British HCI Conference (British HCI '15). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 119-125. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2783446.2783573 

[7]  Häkkilä, J., Colley, A., Inget, V., Alhonsuo, M. and 

Rantakari, J. (2015). Exploring Digital Service Concepts for 
Healthy Lifestyles. In Proceedings of HCI International 
2015, Springer, 470-480. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-20886-
2_44 

 
 
 
