Closing the Gap: Supporting Patients’ Transition  
to Self-Management after Hospitalization 
 Ari H Pollack1,2, Uba Backonja4, Andrew D. Miller4, Sonali R. Mishra3, Maher Khelifi4,  
Logan Kendall4, and Wanda Pratt3 
2Division of Nephrology 
Seattle Children’s Hospital 
Seattle, WA, USA 

3The Information School,  
4Biomedical and Health Informatics  
University of Washington 
Seattle, WA, USA

1Department of Pediatrics 
School of Medicine  
University of Washington 
Seattle, WA, USA 

{apollack; backonja; millerad, srmishra; khelifi; kendall5; wpratt}@uw.edu 

ABSTRACT 
Patients  going  home  after  a  hospitalization  face  many 
challenges.  This  transition  period  exposes  patients  to 
unnecessary risks related to inadequate preparation prior to 
leaving the hospital, potentially leading to errors and patient 
harm. Although patients engaging in self-management have 
better  health  outcomes  and  increased  self-efficacy,  little  is 
known about the processes in place to support and develop 
these  skills  for  patients  leaving  the  hospital.  Through 
qualitative  interviews  and  observations  of  28  patients 
during  and  after  their  hospitalizations,  we  explore  the 
challenges they face transitioning from hospital care to self-
management.  We  identify  three  key  elements  in  this 
process:  knowledge,  resources,  and  self-efficacy.  We 
describe how both system and individual factors contribute 
to  breakdowns  leading  to  ineffective  patient  management. 
This  work  expands  our  understanding  of  the  unique 
challenges  faced  by  patients  during  this  difficult  transition 
and uncovers important design opportunities for supporting 
crucial yet unmet patient needs. 

Author Keywords 
Health informatics; pediatric; hospital; medical informatics; 
self-efficacy; self-management; discharge.  

ACM Classification Keywords 

J.3 Life and Medical Sciences, Health, Medical Information 
Systems; H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation. 

INTRODUCTION 
Hospitals  provide  acute  management  for  both  new  and 
chronic  medical  conditions  with  the  goal  of  treating  and 
stabilizing  patients  so  they  can  return  to  their  life  outside 
the  hospital.  However,  patients  face  many  risks  and 
challenges  after  leaving  the  hospital.  Re-hospitalization, 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored.
Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  
CHI'16, May 07-12, 2016, San Jose, CA, USA   
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3362-7/16/05…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858240 

one  such  risk,  has  been  identified  as  a  major  issue  within 
the  United  States  health  care  system,  impacting  1 out  of  5 
Medicare beneficiaries, leading to $17.4 billion each year in 
unnecessary  spending 
[35].  Although  some  hospital 
readmissions  are  unavoidable,  many  are  preventable  and 
result  from  inadequate  patient  preparation  prior  to  leaving 
the  hospital  (i.e.  discharge)  [11].  Discharge  planning,  a 
common  component  of  many  health  care  systems,  allows 
for  the  development  of  individualized  plans  provided  to  a 
patient  prior  to  leaving  the  hospital,  with  the  goal  of 
improving  patient  outcomes  and  reducing  unnecessary  re-
hospitalizations.  Yet,  it  has  had  mixed  results  [53].  Key 
remaining  challenges  include  patients  having  a  poor 
understanding  of  their  medical  condition  or  low  health 
literacy in general [2,34] as well as patients not being able 
to  access  the  health  resources  they  need  after  discharge 
[37,39]. 

June,  a  16-year-old  competitive  soccer  player,  recently 
returned home from a three-day hospitalization after being 
newly  diagnosed  with  Type  1  diabetes.  In  addition  to 
receiving  the  medical  care  necessary  to  treat  and  manage 
her  new  condition,  hospital  staff  also  provided  intensive 
education  designed  to  teach  June  and  her  family  about 
what diabetes is and how to manage this chronic condition. 
Eager to leave the hospital and return to a normal life, June 
and  her  family  felt  empowered  with  their  newly  acquired 
knowledge,  confident  that  they  had  the  tools  to  face 
whatever  challenges  lay  ahead.  However,  their  feelings  of 
confidence quickly transitioned to feeling overwhelmed and 
unprepared. Previously simple tasks for June, like grabbing 
a snack to bring to soccer practice, now required that she 
read  food  labels,  count  carbs,  and  plan  insulin  injections. 
Should  she  tell  her  coach  or  her  teammates  about  her 
diabetes in case the disease caused her to get ill during an 
away  game,  even  though  she  did  not  want  any  special 
treatment? What would she do if she did not have a place at 
school to take injections in private or to dispose of needles?  

Once  discharged,  patients  and  their  caregivers  need  to 
possess,  or  know  how  to  obtain,  the  knowledge  (e.g. 
including  both  technical/clinical  facts  as  well  as  patient 
expertise [58]) and resources (enablers that help individuals 
manage  their  illness  including  social  support,  access  to 
pharmacies,  etc.)  required  to  provide  care  at  home,  and 

Design for Health Care#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5324respond  appropriately  to  the  routine  as  well  as  unfamiliar 
challenges, referred to as self-management [46]. As a result, 
patients  like  June  (whose  scenario  is  based  on  a  teenaged 
patient  from  our  study)  face  a  number  of  challenges 
immediately after leaving the hospital.  

interaction  (HCI)  methods 

to 
Using  human-computer 
redesign technology for use after hospital discharge has the 
potential  to  bridge  the  resource  and  knowledge gaps faced 
by  patients  and  caregivers.  By  designing  better  tools  that 
consider  the  holistic  needs  of  patients,  clinicians  can 
support  patients 
self-
management.  Although  abundant  research  in  HCI  and 
Health  Informatics  has  explored  how  to  best  support 
patients  with  chronic  diseases  [12,21,28],  we  have  less 
understanding of how technology could support patients as 
they transition to life after an acute hospitalization. 

transition 

through 

their 

to 

to  home,  we  conducted  an 

To  better  understand  how  information  technology  could 
support  patients  and  prepare  them  as  they  move  from 
interview  and 
hospital 
observation  study  with  28  hospitalized  patients  and  their 
family caregivers, prior to and just after discharge. Through 
our  analysis,  we  show  that  many  challenges  the  patients 
face  arise  from  deficiencies  in  three  key  areas:  (1) 
medical Knowledge,  (2)  Resources  to manage  their  health 
(including social support), or (3) Self-efficacy. We describe 
how  these  three  key  areas,  referred  to  as  the  KRS 
framework,  have  the  potential  to  help  guide  design 
opportunities  for  HCI  and  patient-centered  information 
technology  to  support  patients  as  they  transition  from 
hospital-based  management  to  self-management.  Based  on 
multiple  in-depth  interviews,  we  describe  the  challenges 
faced by patients and their families during such a hospital to 
home 
in  medical 
knowledge,  in  resources  needed  to  care  for  one’s  health, 
and  in  self-efficacy  prevent  effective  self-management 
when patients leave the hospital setting. Finally, we outline 
design  recommendations  for  technologies  that  could  help 
address  these  unmet  needs  and  ease  the  burden  of  this 
difficult and fragile transition for patients.  

transition.  We  explore  how  gaps 

BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
With  the  increasing  life  expectancy  of  individuals  around 
the  world,  the  number  living  with  a  chronic  condition  has 
correspondingly  increased  [10].  This  situation  has  led 
individuals  to  self  manage  and  integrate  their  health 
conditions  into  their  daily  routine,  through  self-care  [8]. 
Recently, researchers in the fields of HCI and CSCW have 
explored broadly how technology supports those living with 
a chronic illness and have provided suggestions on how to 
advance  both  research  and  design  to  support  individuals 
living with a chronic illness [24,48].  

low-tech  solutions  have  shown  benefit 

in 
Although 
(e.g. 
events 
reducing  undesirable 
readmission  or  no  follow-up  with  their  primary  physician) 
[4],  they  often  did  not  assess  the  innate  skills  required  for 
self-management at home.  

after  discharge 

Given  that  behavior  change  is  a  key  component  of  self-
management as individuals need to learn how to adapt their 
lifestyle  as  a  result  living  with  a  chronic  illness,  Social 
Cognitive  Theory  [6]  provides  a  useful  lens  to  help 
understand  and  guide  the  patients’  actions  post-discharge. 
SCT has been applied to health promotion interventions [5], 
and  includes  the  key  determinants  of  the  KRS  framework. 
However, SCT alone cannot account for all challenges and 
constraints faced by individuals self-managing their illness. 
Therefore,  new  frameworks  are  needed 
to 
understand  and  design  for  the  needs  of  this  unique 
population. In the sections that follow, we describe patients’ 
knowledge,  resources,  and  self-efficacy  in  the  context  of 
clinical care and related work. 

in  order 

Knowledge 
Traditionally,  hospital  staff  take  the  primary  role  in 
managing  patients  during  the  course  of  a  hospitalization. 
After discharge, patients and their caregivers must take over 
this  management task. Staff try to prepare patients for this 
transition  by  providing  the  appropriate  knowledge  and 
resources  to  ensure  a  smooth  and  seamless  transition. 
Interventions  that  provide  patients  with  medical  education 
at  and  beyond  the  time  of  discharge,  facilitate  access  to 
needed  resources,  or  support  self-efficacy  have  been 
successful  in  improving  patient  health  and  quality  of  life 
and decreasing readmission rates [13,57,62]. However, not 
all  interventions  have  been  reliably  successful,  suggesting 
additional studies are needed to identify useful strategies to 
reduce readmissions [29].  

Despite the education currently provided, patients continue 
to face many challenges after discharge from the hospital. It 
has  been  estimated  that  up  to  20%  of  patients  discharged 
from  US  hospitals  suffer  some  type  of  adverse  event 
leading  to  re-hospitalization  within  90  days,  one  third  of 
which  are  preventable  [25].  Lack  of  knowledge  is  a  key 
factor in these events related to: low health literacy [3,34], 
and  a  poor  understanding  of  medication  regimens  [45]. 
These  knowledge  deficits  lead  to  a  gap  in  effective  care 
after discharge. 

Some  have  explored  technological  solutions  to  address 
these  gaps  in  knowledge.  For  example,  researchers  have 
developed  relational  agents  to  act  as  a  virtual  nurse  who 
helps disseminate information prior to discharge [64] or as 
a  virtual  pharmacist  who  helps  detect  and  resolve  issues 
that  arise  post-hospitalization  [50].  The  patients  preferred 
receiving  their  virtual  discharge  nurse  over  their  human 
nurse  or  doctor  and  expressed  high  levels  of  satisfaction 
with the virtual agent.  

Resources  
To  successfully  manage  health  and  disease  outside  the 
hospital setting, patients must also have access to resources 
that  support  their  transition  to  home  care.  Patients  face 
many  impediments  needed  to  mange  health  outside  the 
hospital  setting.  These  impediments  include  inadequate 
[54],  challenges  with 
social  and 

support 

family 

Design for Health Care#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5325transportation and obtaining medication [40]. These barriers 
to  resources  can  be  particularly  exacerbated  among 
vulnerable  populations.  For  example,  children  and 
adolescents  are  often  dependent  on  their  families  and 
[15],  and 
communities 
individuals  of 
lack 
resources  to  access  health  care  or  engage  in  healthy 
behaviors [9,36]. 

low  socioeconomic  status  often 

for  health-related 

resources 

Self-efficacy 
Self-efficacy refers to a person’s confidence in their ability 
to  accomplish  a  specific  goal  [5,6,12].  Lorig  and  Holman 
describe that in addition to understanding and managing the 
medical components of illness, people need to manage their 
behaviors  as  well  as  the  emotional  sequelea  and  self-
illness  [43].  Although 
their 
efficacy  associated  with 
education programs focusing just on medical aspects of the 
disease  are  not  sufficient  to  improve  health  outcomes  in 
adults  [27],  those  focusing  on  medical  management,  self-
efficacy, and emotional support, the three tasks required for 
self-management,  have  demonstrated  benefits  in  a  variety 
of chronic conditions [44].  

Goal  setting,  a  key  component  of  self-efficacy,  also  plays 
an important role in helping patients manage their illnesses. 
Bodenheimer and colleagues describe how these goals help 
with  the  creation  of  action  plans,  developed  by  patients 
through the use of problem solving skills [12]. The creation 
and  successful  completion  of  patient-derived  action  plans, 
(which take into account knowledge and resources), support 
self-efficacy,  and  provides  patients  with  the  confidence  to 
manage 
increased 
motivation leading to self-management success. In addition, 
coaching  has  shown  to  be  effective  in  enhancing  self-
management especially during times of transition [49].  

illness.  This  results 

their  own 

in 

the  goal-forming  process.  Peers  help 

Although  self-directed  goal  formation  is  important  for 
patients,  patients  often  also  turn  to  others  with  similar 
conditions for information as well as guidance and support 
in 
through 
informational [18], emotional [51], and instrumental forms 
of  support  [32].  With  the  explosion  of  online  health 
communities there are many opportunities for individuals to 
obtain  support  beyond  their  immediate  social  network. 
Hartzler  and  colleagues  describe  how  experienced  patients 
do  not  serve  as  just  “amateur  doctors,”  but  rather  offer 
valuable  personal  information  that  clinicians  often  cannot 
provide  [30].  Patient  expertise  explores  “strategies  [used] 
for  coping  with  day-to-day  personal  health  issues  gained 
through  trial  and  error  of  the  lived  experience  [30].” 
Integrating  patient  expertise  and  promoting  social  support 
resources  in  times  of  transition  should  therefore  help 
inexperienced  patients  with  finding  and  setting  realistic 
goals. 

With  realistic  goals,  patients  then  require  decision-making 
and  problem  solving  skills  to  support  goal  attainment. 
These key skills of self-management require individuals to 
have access to, gather and interpret data (i.e. sensemaking). 

Mamykina  and  colleagues  have  proposed  a  sensemaking 
framework for chronic-disease self-management [46]. With 
patients in one of two modes based on the familiarity of an 
experience,  they  utilize  different  skills  to  navigate  these 
experiences.  

Recognizing  the  benefits  of  self-management,  hospitals 
have  an  opportunity  to  integrate  knowledge,  facilitate 
access  to  resources,  and  support  self-efficacy,  to  aid 
patients as they transition from hospital care to self care.  

METHODS 
Our work is part of a larger study, which was approved by 
the authors’ institutional review board and the participating 
hospitals, exploring how to increase patient engagement in 
preventing  hospital-based  errors.  We  conducted  interviews 
and observations with 28 adult and pediatric (i.e. child and 
adolescent) patients and their caregivers hospitalized at two 
different  hospitals  in  Seattle,  Washington,  United  States. 
One  is  an  adult  hospital  that  serves  local  patients  from 
various  socioeconomic  and  ethnic  backgrounds.  The  other 
is  a  children’s  hospital  that  serves  pediatric  patients  from 
urban  and  rural  areas  from  various  regional  states.  We 
chose  these  two  sites  because  of  the  different  challenges 
faced  by  adult  and  pediatric  patients  in  the  discharge 
process. While adult patients may have a caregiver assisting 
them  post-discharge,  pediatric  patients  almost  always  rely 
on  the  support  of  adult  caregivers  because  of  their  minor 
status  and  they  may  not  be  developmentally  capable  of 
caring for themselves. Thus pediatric patients are dependent 
on caregivers who have their own goals and needs to aid in 
the  patients’  self-management.  Therefore  we  sought  to 
understand  and  include  multiple  populations  to  understand 
the  range  of  complexities  and  associated  with  and 
similarities across self-care strategies. 

Study Procedures 
Patients  were  recruited  over  a  four-month  period  between 
February  2015  and  May  2015.  For  each  patient,  we 
conducted  three  semi-structured  interview  or  observation 
sessions that occurred pre- and post-discharge. First, while 
the patient was in the hospital, the initial sessions with both 
patients and their caregivers lasted 40-60 minutes. Next we 
observed  the  patient  while  he/she  was  still  in  the  hospital 
for  60-90  minutes.  Typically, 
interviews  and 
observations  occurred  1-2  days  prior  to  the  patient’s 
discharge.  Finally,  we  carried  out  a  follow-up  phone 
interview within 1-2 weeks after the patient was discharged 
from  the  hospital.  Follow-up  interviews  lasted  up  to  30 
minutes  and  were  guided  and  informed  by  the  initial 
interviews  and  allowed  us  to  determine  if  the  patients’ 
needs and expectations were met after discharge. 

these 

In the interviews, participants (both patients and caregivers) 
were asked about their current hospital visit, exploring their 
experiences  in  providing  and receiving  information  related 
to  their  care.  The  follow  up  interviews  occurred  shortly 
after  discharge  and  followed  up  on  items  discussed  and 

Design for Health Care#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5326events that occurred after the first interview. All interviews 
were audio-recorded and transcribed prior to analysis. 

patients had a range of educational levels, with most having 
had at least some college. 

We  also  conducted  bedside  observations  with  all  the 
participants, typically after the initial interview. During the 
observation  period,  a  member  of  the  research  team  sat  in 
took  notes.  We  focused  on 
the  hospital  room  and 
discussions  regarding  the  patient’s  care,  communications 
between patients, caregivers, and providers, and finally the 
use of technology or other information artifacts in the room. 

Study Sites  
Our study took place at one adult and one pediatric hospital 
in  a  large  urban  area,  Seattle,  WA,  in  the  United  States. 
Each hospital serves as a tertiary referral center for a large 
geographic  region.  The  adult  hospital  admits  over  16,000 
patients  each  year,  and  the  pediatric  hospital  admits  over 
15,000 patients each year. Patients at the adult hospital have 
similar demographics with the local area’s population, and 
two-thirds of the patients are covered by private insurance. 
The  pediatric  hospital  has  a  slightly  more  diverse  patient 
population  then  the  surrounding  area,  and  less  than  half 
have private insurance. 

Participants 
Due to our site selection and sampling methods we had the 
opportunity  to  recruit  patients  with  a  wide  variety  of  ages 
and  medical  conditions.  This  allowed  us  to  see  whether 
themes  were  common  across  age  and  medical  condition. 
We recruited a total of 48 people to participate: 28 patients 
and  20  caregivers  across  both  sites.  Our  methodology 
utilized a purposeful sampling framework focusing on age, 
gender, ethnicity,  medical service, and disease complexity. 
Research coordinators employed by each hospital recruited 
and consented participants on behalf of the research team.  

Patient  participants  had  diverse  reasons  for  being  in  the 
hospital,  which  represented  varying  levels  of  complexity 
and medical needs. Fifty percent of the patients, were in the 
hospital  on  the  surgical  service  after  undergoing  different 
procedures such as a heart or kidney transplant, hip repair, 
gall  stone  removal,  cleft  lip  repair,  and  infection  drainage. 
The other 50% of patients were cared for on medical teams 
for  problems  such  as  a  blood  infection,  diabetes,  Chron’s 
disease,  chronic  obstructive  pulmonary  disease,  kidney 
failure,  pneumonia,  and  heart  disease.  Otherwise,  patients 
were  equally  divided  in  the  following  categories:  pediatric 
vs  adult,  chronic  vs.  non-chronic  conditions,  and  male  vs. 
female. Though, of the 28 patients, 20 had previously been 
hospitalized for some reason that could have been related to 
the  current  condition  for  which  they  were  receiving  care. 
Patients’  ages  ranged  between  7  and  76.  In  the  pediatric 
hospital  (14  patients),  half  of  the  patients  were  age  7-13 
years  and  half  age  13-17  years.  In  the  adult  hospital  (14 
patients),  patients  were  evenly  split  between  ages  18-39, 
40-59,  and  60-76  years.  Patients  were  more  ethnically 
diverse 
the  American  population:  18  were 
White/Caucasian, 6 Black/African American, 3 Hispanic, 2 
Asian,  and  1  American  Indian/Alaska  Native.  Adult 

than 

In  addition,  we  enrolled  20  caregivers  who  were  present 
when patients were recruited. Half were 18-39 and the other 
half  were  40-59.  Caregivers  were  predominantly  female, 
especially at the pediatric hospital. Of the 20 caregivers that 
participated,  16  were  parents  of  pediatric  patients  and  4 
were caregivers of adult patients. 

Analysis 
Throughout  the  interviews  and  observations,  the  research 
team  met  regularly  to  discuss  preliminary  findings  and 
identify  themes  in  the  data  to  identify  the  gaps  associated 
with  discharge  preparation.  Transcripts  were  reviewed  and 
coded by three members of the research team using AtlasTi. 
Initial  coding  was  developed  through  an  iterative  process 
and not guided by a theory or framework identified a priori.  

and 

support 

FINDINGS 
Throughout our analysis, it became clear that the challenges 
patients experienced during their time of transition to self-
management related to three areas: Knowledge, Resources, 
and  Self-efficacy  (KRS).  Below  we  show  how  the  KRS 
areas  frame  two  key  themes:  (1)  Gaps  in  System-based 
(2)  Elements  of 
Self-Management 
Individual  Self-Management.  Gaps  in  system-based  self-
management  support  relate  to  the  importance  of  hospital-
based practices  in supporting  individuals  as  they  transition 
from  hospital  management  to  self-management.  Elements 
of individual self-management relate to the various states of 
individuals 
towards  effective  self-
management.  Below  we  describe  findings  by  theme  and 
provide  quotations  to  illustrate  each  theme.  We  identify 
participants with a code: The first letter indicates the site as 
adult  (A)  or  pediatric  (P),  the  second  letter  designates 
patient  (P)  or  caregiver  (C),  and  the  number  is  a  unique 
identification provided by the research team.  

journey 

their 

in 

Gaps in System-based Self-Management Support 
Despite  the  large  amounts  of  knowledge  patients  gain 
during a hospitalization, many patients are still unprepared 
to  successfully  self-manage  their  illness  at  home.  This 
finding was present in both adult and pediatric populations 
and  across  different  medical  conditions.  The  gap  between 
hospital  management  and  self-management  is  related  to 
three  key  factors:  (1)  most  information  transferred  to 
patients  occurs  verbally,  which  makes  it  difficult  for 
patients  to  process  and  remember,  (2)  patients  lack  the 
necessary  patient  expertise  to  adequately  integrate  the 
knowledge  back  into  their  lives,  and  (3)  patients  and 
caregivers  often  have  low  self-efficacy,  preventing  them 
from  accomplishing  specific  tasks.  Although  the  later  two 
items  are  individual  in  nature,  we  identify  how  all  three 
factors relate back to fundamental system failures.  

Challenges  with  verbal  information  transfer.  Although 
most  hospitals  utilize  electronic  health  records  (EHR)  to 
document, order, and organize the care provided to patients 

Design for Health Care#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5327in the hospital, these systems support the information needs 
of  clinicians  rather  than  patients.  Despite  the  fact  that 
patients  are  legally  entitled  to  their  medical  information 
contained  within  the  EHR,  most  hospitals  do  not  provide 
easy or timely access [33,47]. Instead, patients obtain most 
of  their  results  and  the  reasoning  behind  the  care  they 
receive  verbally  from  nurses  and  physicians.  However, 
without  a  concrete  record  for  patients  to  refer  to,  their 
ability to retain it for future use is called into question. Not 
to  mention  the  overwhelming  volume  of  information 
presented over the course of a hospitalization: 

I didn't understand and they were talking so fast and I didn't 
know  what  was  important  and  what  wasn't.  Like  I  wasn't 
able to tell my family what was going on because there was 
just so much information. (PC04) 

In  addition  to the  lack of  tangible  information  available  to 
patients  after  a  verbal  exchange,  another  important  barrier 
relates to the physical and mental state of patients while in 
the  hospital.  Often  patients  are  not  capable  of  interacting 
with  the  medical  team  in  a  way  conducive  to  effective 
information transfer.  

to 

relates 
parameters required for self-management.  

the  ability 

track 

to 

important  metrics  or 

If  I  can’t  keep  track,  I  forgot  and  then  usually  I  need  my 
parents  to  help  me  keep  track  of  some  things,  because  if  I 
don’t keep track of it I lose information. (PP05) 

When  patients  lack  expertise  they  feel  overwhelmed  or 
helpless,  and  not  knowing  where  to  turn  for  help.  In  this 
situation  patients  clearly  lack  both  knowledge  and  self-
efficacy to manager their illness. 

Sometimes  she’ll  get  sad  or  she’ll  feel  like  she’s  alone. 
(PC14) 

the 

Fortunately, instead of taking the time to develop their own 
expertise,  patients  turn  to  others  for  help.  Although  many 
have  discussed 
importance  of  online  patient 
communities [18,26,52] as well as in-person patient support 
groups [32] that support the needs of patients with a chronic 
illness,  little  is  known  about  how  a  resource  of  peer 
expertise might help people in the hospital prepare for self 
management.  Nonetheless,  we  found  that  patients  are 
clearly interested in such a resource. 

I really was out of it, I was not the best advocate for myself 
while  I  was  there,  because  I  was  at  such  diminished 
capacity that I wasn't advocating for myself like I normally 
would when I'm in my normal state. (AP06) 

We haven’t [found any other families who need to deal with 
the same condition]. It’s something I would definitely like to 
do  -  being  that  we  live  in  a  smaller  area,  our  options  are 
pretty small. (PC14) 

Despite  the  strong  efforts  of  hospitals  to  educate  their 
patients  in  preparation  for  discharge,  patients  continue  to 
have large gaps in the information or knowledge needed to 
support  them  in  self-management  due  to  communication 
challenges  stemming  from  a  lack  of  understanding  of 
complex  medical  information  and  being  unprepared  or 
unable to process this information.  

Lack  of  patient  expertise.  Although  some  discharge 
information provides a basic framework for re-introduction 
into  life  outside  of  the  hospital,  many  patients  are  not 
completely  prepared  for  this  transition.  Because  patient-
expertise  requires  some  degree  of  trial  and  error  through 
real  experiences,  it  is  not  surprising  that  patients  are 
unprepared  after  discharge.  In  the  controlled  setting  of  the 
hospital,  patients  are  not  exposed  to  the  variety  or 
spontaneity  of  interactions  they  are  likely  to  experience 
once they leave the hospital.  

I mean for her, she's like "Am I still going to be able to do 
my  sport?"  Even  though  they  keep  saying  that,  she  won't 
believe it until she does. (PC06) 

So I felt like I was prepared to take care of him, it was just a 
matter  of  taking  care  of  him  in  our  environment  that  we 
were  going  to.  That  I  wasn't  sure  about  -  and  am  still  not 
sure, we're still figuring it out. (PC04) 

However,  for  many,  discovering  a  lack  of  expertise  only 
occurs after getting back home. Often, the lack of expertise 

Although  we  know  that  patient  expertise  does  exist  in  the 
hospital,  the  ability  for  non-expert  patients  to  obtain  this 
form  of  support  from  those more  experienced  while  in  the 
hospital  is  constrained  because  of  privacy  concerns  or 
physical constraints related to an illness.  

Due to gaps in knowledge, specifically understanding how 
to  integrate  their  illness  into  their  daily  routines  after 
leaving  the  hospital,  as  well  as  poor  self-efficacy,  patients 
clearly lack the expertise or confidence necessary to engage 
in self-management before leaving the hospital. 

self-efficacy.  Many  patients 

Low 
feel  completely 
overwhelmed  by  their  illness,  and  this  feeling  leads  to  the 
inability to effectively self-manage. 

It's been overwhelming, one day at a time. Just trying to - I 
mean it's just reorganization of your entire life. (PC06) 

However,  providing  patients  and  their  caregivers  with 
simple  support  tools,  allows  them  to  escape  the  cycle  of 
despair and hopelessness. Support can come in the form of 
informational,  emotional,  or  instrumental  (i.e.  providing 
additional resources) [32].  

When  I’m  really,  really  worried,  I  get  really  stressed  out 
and  no  one  helps  me,  and  I  overstress  and  I  get  just  -  but 
when someone helps me, I stop stressing (PC05) 

Design for Health Care#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5328Although  hospital-based  systems  provide  significant  and 
diverse  forms  of  support  to  patients  in  the  hospital,  this 
support  does  not  adequately  prepare  all  patients  for 
successful  self-management  after  leaving  the  hospital.  We 
identified specific challenges in ensuring that patients have 
the  necessary  knowledge,  resources,  and  self-efficacy  to 
support  successful  self-management.  However,  ensuring 
patients  have 
the  emotional  and  physical  support 
throughout  their  hospitalization,  should  help  foster  self-
efficacy  earlier,  which  in  turn  should  help  facilitate 
knowledge  acquisition  and  ultimately  the  development  of 
patient expertise easing the transition to self-management. 

Elements of Individual Self-Management  
We  found  that  both  adult  and  pediatric  patients  and  their 
caregivers  discussed  knowledge,  resources,  and  self-
efficacy  as  important  issues  to  support  self-management. 
Based  on  these  findings,  we  developed  the  Knowledge, 
Resources, and Self-efficacy (KRS) Framework of Hospital 
Discharge  to  describe  how  these  elements  intersect  to 
support  self-management  (Figure  1).  We  propose  this 
framework  because  while  SCT  includes  these  concepts,  it 
may  be  limited  in  the  hospital  setting  where  sociocultural 
influences  may  be  constrained.  Also,  individuals  have  less 
control  over  their  health  because  they  may  not  (1)  be 
physically  or  mentally  capable  of  engaging  in  or  have 
control of their care or (2) have access to key knowledge or 
resources because of clinician- and system-level issues. 

In  reality,  patients  might  have  two,  one,  or  none  of  the 
elements,  which  can  hamper  efforts  to  engage  in  self-
management. We will describe each of the combinations of 
knowledge, resources, and self-efficacy and illustrate them 
using quotes from the study. 

Knowledge  only.  Patients  could  have  only  knowledge 
without  resources  or  self-efficacy.  This  situation  is  seen 
often  in  current  hospital  discharge  practice  in  which 
patients are provided information about medications, future 
appointments,  and  the  plan  for  managing  their  health. 
However,  hospital  staff  do  not  (1)  assess  which  resources 
patients  have  or  (2)  provide  time  for  patients  to  learn  and 
practice skills that are needed to carry out the plans.  

We saw an example of this in an adult patient (AP02). He 
had  been  admitted  for  Chronic  Obstructive  Pulmonary 
Disease  (COPD).  Although  he  had  been  living  with  the 
disease  before  being  admitted  and  knew  what  medications 
he needed to take. However, due to financial reasons he had 
to  stop  taking  the  medication,  which  exacerbated  his 
symptoms and lead to being admitted to the hospital.  

I was off for a couple of weeks for financial reasons why I 
didn't  get  it  refilled  and  stuff…My  condition  just  became 
deteriorated.  I  had  trouble  breathing  and  I  was  real 
fatigued all the time, and that brought me here. 

He  also  stated  that  previously  he  did  not  have  the 
motivation  to  adequately  care  for  his  health,  including 
proper  use  of  the  oxygen  tank  he  had  been  prescribed. 

Knowledge

1

Resources

3

2

4

Self-efficacy

Figure 1. The Knowledge, Resources, and Self-efficacy 
(KRS) Framework of Hospital Discharge. Self-management 
(star). When lacking the complete set, patients may posses a 
combination of elements (1-3), a single element (knowledge, 
resources, or self-efficacy), or no elements (4). 

While he had always cared for himself, he did not have the 
motivation to listen and learn from the clinicians on how to 
best  manage  his  health.  Ultimately,  he  appeared  to  be 
gaining motivation to support the full development of self-
efficacy. 

I was just really ready to listen to what they were telling me 
because  I  knew  there  was  something  that  was  out  of  my 
control, something that I needed to let somebody else take 
care of and listen to what they were saying … this was my 
health, because I didn't like the way I was feeling. So I was 
ready to listen … I kind of felt it was time to, like they say, 
put  the  cotton  in  your  mouth  and  open  the  ears,  because 
I've  always  taken  care  of  myself,  and  listen  to  myself,  and 
make  my  own  decisions  based  on  myself.  I  never  –  but  I 
thought it was time to listen to others. 

Resources  only.  Some  patients  have  resources  but  not 
knowledge  or  self-efficacy.  These  patients  have  access  to 
social  and  physical  resources  (e.g.,  family  caregivers, 
access  to  health  insurance  and  a  pharmacy  to  obtain 
medication).  However,  the  hospital  staff  did  not  provide 
them  all  the  information  needed  to  successfully  manage 
their care because the information was not tailored to their 
individual  needs.  Often,  the  materials  that  hospital  staff 
utilize are created for a general population, such as exercise 
and  diet  pamphlets  that  do  not  take  into  account  cultural 
dimensions. Also, the patients do not have the confidence to 
the 
perform  new 
opportunity  to  be  taught  and  practice  the  skills  under  the 
guidance of health professionals at the hospital.  

they  did  not  have 

tasks  because 

PC04  provides  an  example  of  having  only  resources.  The 
pediatric  patient  and  his  caregiver  had  access  to  the 
medications 
the  pediatric  patient  needed  post-
discharge.  However,  the  caregiver  did  not  have  the 
information  and  skills  needed  to  prepare  the  medication 
properly. 

that 

… they kept preparing me for the fact that this [medication] 
would have to be given a certain way until he starts eating 

Design for Health Care#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5329and  then  we  can  sprinkle  it.  It's  a  tab  that  has  the  little 
sprinkles inside of it. Well, when I went to the pharmacy to 
get  his  medications,  they  didn't  give  me  that  version  of  it. 
They gave me a like a horse pill that I have to crush, and so 
they  spent  so  much  time  preparing  me  for  one  thing  and 
then I  got a  completely  different  version of  the  medication 
... I kind of wish I would have gotten the medication maybe 
a  couple  of  days  before  discharge,  so  I  could  have  done 
them  in  the  hospital,  like  with  the  nurses,  just  so  I  would 
have  had  a  better  idea  of  that.  Because  that  first  night  it 
took me about two hours to do his medications. 

Self-efficacy  only.  Patients  with  only  self-efficacy 
represent few patients at discharge but could still exist and 
be  impacted  by  the  current  discharge  practices.  These 
patients have the confidence to manage their health but lack 
the knowledge and resources to carry out self-management. 
AP13 provides an illustration of self-efficacy only. She had 
been  living with  Crohn’s Disease  for  over 10  years  so  she 
had the skills and confidence on how to manage her health. 
However,  she  had  been  admitted  to  the  hospital  for  a  new 
kidney condition.  

It’s  kind  of  a  habit  I’ve  cultivated  over  the  last  13  years 
with Crohn’s, I make sure I have everything – everybody’s 
questions in a row and I get them all answered … I’m kind 
of  used  to all my  research being about guts  and  stuff, and 
all of a sudden I’ve got kidneys to deal with… 

She did not posses the knowledge about this new condition 
because  the  clinicians  did  not  know  what  was  causing  the 
problem  and  the  patient  did  not  know  much  about  kidney 
disease. Also, she was having problems accessing adequate 
medical care where she lived. 

Trying to get information from here to [Medical clinic] and 
[Medical  clinic]  to  here,  because  my  insurance  company 
wanted me to have my primary a little closer to home, but I 
think  that’s  just  not  going  to  be  a  workable  thing.  We’re 
going to have to figure something out. 

Knowledge  and  Resources  (Figure  1,  area  1).  The 
patients who would benefit the most from a restructuring of 
hospital  discharge  are  patients  who  have  knowledge  and 
resources,  even  though  they  lack  self-efficacy.  These 
patients  have  an  understanding  of  their  disease  and  its 
management and have the resources to mange their health; 
however,  they  are  in  need  of  motivation  or  confidence  in 
their ability to manage their health.  

Pediatric  participant  PP09  is  an  example  of  someone  who 
has  knowledge  and  resources  but  lacks  self-efficacy.  The 
hospital  provided  the  parent  with  information  about  post-
discharge care. The pediatric patient also had social support 
– their parent – and access to medical care including on-call 
help via phone when needed. 

I needed to know for the care of my son and they gave me 
everything  what  I  need,  all  the  numbers,  if  I  had  any 
questions. They gave me my follow up appointment. I mean, 

basically  it  was  good.  They  gave  me  all  the  information  I 
needed … I did call them … because for his blood pressure 
- I've been doing at home so I did call them on Monday just 
to  make  sure  that  his  blood  pressure  and  his  pulse  was  in 
the right range. 

However, the patient did not have the self-efficacy to take 
their  medications.  The  parent  was  in  the  process  of 
providing  him  the  confidence  in  his  ability  to  take 
medications through teaching. 

Right  now,  yes,  it's  just  me  [the  parent  giving  him  the 
medications], but I'm also training him. I'm telling him you 
need  to  know  and  now  I've  been  training  him  so  he  could 
look at the pills and knows what pill is what. 

Resources and self-efficacy (Figure 1, area 2). There may 
be  patients  who  have  the  resources  and  self-efficacy  but 
lack knowledge needed to engage in self-management. It is 
possible  to  easily  address  this  by  providing  tailored 
information  to  patients  before  discharge,  which  can  be 
facilitated  by  clinical  and/or  personal  technologies.  These 
patients are likely to have resources, including tangible and 
informational,  available  after  discharge.  In  addition,  these 
patients typically have high levels of motivation to get their 
health back on track.  

Caregiver  PC05  of  a  pediatric  patient  is  an  example  of 
having  resources  and  self-efficacy  but  lacking  knowledge. 
This parent was caring for her child and had the resources 
and self-efficacy to learn about the medications her son was 
taking and she had resources to purchase these medications. 
She  also  had  some  knowledge  about  what  to  expect  after 
discharge.  

…we looked up some of the medications like on Google that 
he's on now … we talked about what appointments he was 
going to need after he was out, what appointments we had 
to come back for … and following up with the kidney doctor 
or the urology [doctor]. 

However, she lacked important knowledge about her son’s 
treatment plan, specifically what medications he needed to 
take after discharge. 

… so like when we left [the hospital] I wasn't sure if I was 
still  supposed  to  give  him  the  [medication]  when  we  got 
home,  I  realized  they  had  been  giving  him  an  anti-acid  in 
the  hospital  but  there  wasn't  anywhere  on  the  form  about 
whether or not we should take them. So I think there was a 
slight gap in how everything - information passing over.  

Knowledge  and  Self-efficacy  (Figure  1,  area  3).  The 
situation  in  which  patients  have  knowledge  and  self-
efficacy  but  not  resources  may  occur  frequently,  in 
particular in areas where there may be system or structural 
barriers to resources. An illustrative patient could include a 
patient admitted to a hospital related to their diabetes. They 
have had the disease for many years so they know about the 
disease and how to manage it. However, they live in an area 
with frequent power outages so it is difficult to keep critical 

Design for Health Care#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5330medication  stored  in  their  refrigerator  at  the  proper 
temperature. 

AP12  exemplifies  this  scenario.  She  was  admitted  for  a 
planned orthopedic surgery and had been given information 
before  being  admitted  and  while  in  the  hospital.  She  also 
had the confidence to take her medications and understand 
much  about  the  medical  system  and  her  care  specifically 
because she worked in healthcare.  

I had kind of picked her [the surgeon’s] brain before on my 
pre-op  appointment,  and  I  did  a  little  research  …  she  has 
actually  a  documentary,  like  a  short  four-minute  thing  on 
her website, it talks about what they do and what to expect 
and  then  six  or  eight  months  down  the  road  I  should  be 
going back to a more regular routine  

However,  she  lacked  the  needed  resources  when  the 
hospital, her health insurance, and her military benefits did 
not coordinate, resulting in billing concerns. 

…when  I  had  called  to  schedule  I  had  been  told  from  my 
insurance  company  that  I  had  approval  and  I  called 
scheduling, they said they didn’t have anything and because 
I had military stuff pending on my surgery, she said “well, I 
can send you a bill, but it’s going to be $60,000,” but they 
didn’t  since  then.  And  I  called  financial  aid  and  all  that, 
they haven’t said “well, your patient portion is going to be 
this, and this is how much,” so I have no idea what my bill 
looks like. And that bothered me a little bit going into this, 
not knowing if I owe $10,000 or $10. 

No knowledge, resources, or self-efficacy (Figure 1, area 
4). These patients lack the knowledge, resources, and self-
efficacy  to  engage  in  self-management.  They  may  be  the 
most challenging at discharge but potentially have the most 
to gain from any support. Because all of the subjects in our 
study had access to healthcare, by the very nature of being 
in  the  hospital,  we  have  no  such  examples  to  describe. 
However,  here  we  provide  a  hypothetical  example  to 
illustrate this case. Imagine a teenager who is a very recent 
immigrant,  admitted  to  an  emergency  department  because 
of injuries from a sexual assault. They come from a culture 
where  sexual assault  is not discussed  so  they do  not know 
about  what  constitutes  sexual  assault  and  consequences  of 
being  sexually  assaulted.  Because  of  the  psychological 
consequences  of  being  assaulted  and  being  in  a  new 
country,  they  lack  confidence  in  their  ability  to  manage 
their  health  or  social  interactions.  Also,  because  they  are 
not  a  citizen  and  in  a  country  with  a  medical  system  with 
which  they  are  unfamiliar,  they  may  lack  the  resources  to 
medical care after they leave the emergency department.  

DESIGN OPPORTUNITIES 
Our analysis at the time of transition after a hospitalization 
has  highlighted  the  presence  of  a  gap  between  hospital-
based  care  and  individual-driven  care  at  home  for  both 
adult and pediatric populations and across different medical 
conditions.  This  gap  leads  to  challenges  for  patients 

Figure 2. Ideally patients should have the opportunity to 
develop the necessary self-management elements over 
time while under the support and guidance of the hospital 
and its resources prior to discharge.  

to 

to 

this  problem.  With  understanding 

recovering  from  an  illness  to  engage  in  self-management 
because  often  there  are  not  opportunities  to  (1)  support 
health knowledge, (2) to access resources, and (3) promote 
self-efficacy,  each  of  which  contribute  to  successful  self-
management  outside  the  hospital.  In  addition,  hospital-
based  system  challenges  and  individual  personal  traits 
contribute 
the 
contributing  factors 
this  gap,  designers  have  an 
opportunity  to  focus  on  specific  patient  needs  that  provide 
support to patients during this risky time of transition from 
hospital to home. Based on findings regarding expectations 
and  experiences  post  discharge,  we  first  focus  on  system 
support issues ripe for potential design improvements, then 
discuss  the  opportunities  available  to  support  individual 
patients who are missing one or more elements required for 
the 
effective 
opportunities 
in 
take  place  prior 
preparation for self-management after discharge to address 
pre-discharge expectations and prevent adverse experiences 
post-discharge. 

self-management.  We 

to  discharge 

focused 

that 

on 

System Support 
Traditionally,  hospitals  expect  patients  to  begin  self-
management  only  at  the  time  of  discharge.  Although  they 
provide resources to support this transition, we have shown 
that, in reality, patients still struggle. Given the importance 
of  the  knowledge  gained  from  patient  expertise  and  self-
efficacy  in  supporting  self-management,  it  is  unrealistic  to 
expect  that  these  elements  will  be  present  immediately  at 
the time of discharge. Ideally, a system should support their 
progressive  development  over 
transition  period, 
culminating with patients completely engaging in their own 
self-management  at  the  time  of  discharge  (Figure  2).  This 
strategy  supports  patients  as  they  develop  the  necessary 
skills,  without  having  to worry  about  failure,  because  they 
remain supported by the hospital.  

the 

Through the KRS framework, we can beging to understand 
the  unique  and  varying  needs  of  patients  throughout  their 
hospitalization  and  morre  importantly  how  these  needs 
change  overtime.  The  framework  will  allow  tools  to  be 
tailored to meet the individual needs of patients in an early 
yet  gradual  and  supported  transition  to  self-management, 
taking  into  consideration  the  unique  constraints  (both 
physical and cognitive placed on patients as a result of their 
illness.  In  the  following  sections,  we  discuss  technology 
opportunities to allow hospitals to realize this goal. 

Design for Health Care#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5331Capturing and Retaining Verbal Information 
We  have  described  multiple  issues  with  information 
exchange  to  patients  due  to  communication  challenges  for 
hospitalized patients that in turn can impact patients’ health 
knowledge  and  self-efficacy.  These  include  excessive 
amounts  of  information,  unfamiliar  or  confusing  medical 
terms, an inability to process information in real time, and 
an inability to receive information in the first place, due to 
altered states of cognition resulting from a patient’s illness. 
Not  only  is  the  volume  and  content  of  information 
overwhelming for patients, but so is the speed at which it is 
delivered, resulting in misunderstandings and errors [60].  

In  the  outpatient  setting,  others  have  recommended  an 
automated  approach  to  capturing  verbal  information  [60], 
in  a  cancer  consultation  setting,  simple  audio 
and 
recordings have improved patients recall of the information 
[61] and been rated highly by patients [1]. However, simple 
audiotapes  provide  limited  search  and  retrieval  capability. 
rounds  and  other 
Capturing  verbal  content  during 
hospital based clinician interactions could build on research 
from the field of ubiquitous computing to go beyond simple 
audio recordings. 

the 

review  of 

further  contextualization  of 

to  encourage 
[38], 

Although  embedded  capture  and  access  technologies  have 
recorded 
the  potential 
conversations 
this 
information has the potential  to improve its  comprehension. 
For  example,  medication  names,  laboratory  tests,  and  even 
medical  problems  or  diagnoses  could  be  associated  with 
relevant 
tailored  medical 
information)  [7,17]  providing  patients  the  ability  to  obtain 
this  critical  information  on  demand  at  a  time  of  their 
choosing.  

InfoButtons 

links  or 

(i.e., 

Finding Expertise in the Hospital 
To  gain  clinical  knowledge  and  patient  expertise,  patients, 
including  the  patients  in  this  study,  are  spending  more  time 
online  searching  for  health  related  information,  including 
other  patients’  experiences,  to address  various  gaps  [26,52]. 
In addition, we know that patient expertise is obtainable from 
both online communities as well as in-person support groups, 
but  these  venues  typically  support  patients  outside  of  the 
hospital  [18,32].  Although  preliminary  work  explores  how 
social  interactions  support  children  and  adolescents  with 
chronic  disease  in  the  hospital  setting  [59],  more  work  is 
needed  to  understand  how  this  technology  can  support  both 
children and adults during the times of transition at the end of 
a  hospitalization.  Work  is  also  needed  to  explore  how 
hospitals  and  patients  can  address  the  knowledge  needs  of 
patients  who  may  not  have  reliable  or  any  access  to  online 
resources  (e.g.,  lack  of  consistent  internet  access  because 
they live in a rural area or lack a steady income to pay each 
internet bill). 

Besides  directing  patients  to  external  resources,  hospital-
based  support  has  the  potential  to  also  fill  the  patient-
expertise  gap.  Preliminary  work  [31,41]  has  shown  the 
potential  in  cataloging  and  archiving  previous  patients’ 

formats 

personal histories, experiences, challenges, and solutions in a 
(e.g.  written  or  video 
variety  of  different 
biographies),  allowing  current  patients 
this 
information from a trusted source with minimal effort. At the 
very least hospitals need to enable patient access to expertise 
from  their  peers,  and  provide  ways  for  them  to  locate  it 
within the hospital [19]. 

to  obtain 

Supporting Self-Efficacy  
Although we have described how gaps in clinical knowledge 
and  patient  expertise  can  lead  to  low  self-efficacy,  systems 
supporting  self-efficacy  also  support  self-management,  at 
least  in  the  outpatient  setting  [12,14].  Preliminary  work  in 
hospitals  have  shown  that  technology  supports  patient 
engagement  leading  to  self-efficacy  through  contextualized 
information and communication portals [22,23,63]. Although 
these  systems  focus  on  care  planning,  goal  setting,  and 
medication  tracking—all  important  for  improving  self-
efficacy—our  results  demonstrate  the  need  for  additional 
support tools.  

We have reported patients’ challenges in understanding their 
capabilities and limits related to physical activity and diet. In 
addition,  patients  commented  on  their  ability  to  understand 
how their actions impact certain clinical parameters—such as 
blood tests, changes in body weight, or just their overall well-
being. Therefore, providing patients with the ability to track a 
variety of parameters, outcomes or actions may help provide 
them  with  a  better  understanding  of  (1)  how  their  ability  to 
meet  specific  goals  has  changed  over  the  course  of  their 
hospitalization  and  (2)  how  their  behaviors  and  actions 
directly  impact  their  clinical  course.  Work  outside  the 
hospital  has  explored  the  benefits  of  self  tracking  related  to 
general wellness [20] and chronic disease management [55], 
but  little  is  known  about  how  this  technology  can  influence 
patients  in  the  hospital.  In  addition,  we  need  to  develop 
technological  solutions  that  support  the  integration  of  self-
tracking  tools  and  electronic  health  records  so  patients  can 
see  this  data  in  context  with  the  rest  of  their  medical 
information.  These  tools  must  minimize  the  burden  of 
tracking personal information [42], especially in light of the 
physical  and  mental  constraints  faced  by  hospitalized 
patients. Finally, we need to expand our understanding how 
individuals  utilize  this  type  of  information  [16],  specifically 
focusing  on  how  to  frame  the  data  to  support  patient  goals 
and  self-efficacy,  which  are  likely  different  from  those 
needed  to  support  general  wellness  or  chronic  disease 
tracking activities outside the hospital. 

Identifying Patients’ Needs to Provide Tailored Individual 
Support 
The common thread across the design recommendations we 
have  discussed  thus  far  is  that  to  support  patient  self-
management, hospitals and patients need to work together to 
identify  which  of  the  three  elements  that  patients  possess. 
With this understanding, using the KRS framework, systems 
can  better  tailor  resources  to  meet  the  individual  needs  of 
patients. To identify these needs requires both individual- and 
system-level considerations. 

Design for Health Care#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5332At the  individual  level, we need to ensure patients have the 
necessary  skills  required  for  self-management  (e.g.  decision 
making and problem solving) [43]. By identifying individual 
deficiencies  in  one  or  more  of  the  three  elements—
knowledge,  resources,  and  self-efficacy—hospital  staff  can 
tailor  specific  strategies  to  fit  the  underlying  needs.  Most 
often this work will rely on a combination of technologies we 
just  described.  However,  to  ensure  resources  are  allocated 
efficiently  and  effectively,  understanding  individual  patient 
needs  will  be  key.  In  addition,  these  tools  should  support 
short-  and  long-term  self-management  tailored  to  a  specific 
type or class of  medical conditions. Individuals with an acute 
medical  condition,  such  as  a  broken  bone,  and  a  chronic 
medical  condition,  such  as  diabetes,  will  need  knowledge, 
resources,  and  self-efficacy  to  engage  in  self-management. 
The difference lies in how long self-management needs to be 
sustained. In particular, for individuals with chronic diseases, 
their  knowledge,  resources,  and  self-efficacy  needs  may 
change over time and disease progression, and therefore the 
self-management  strategies  may  need  to  adjust  to  those 
changes requiring the use of flexible tools and strategies. 

At the system level, hospitals need to support patients as they 
transition  from  hospital  management  to  self-management. 
This will require multiple changes to existing hospital-based 
practices. Hospitals and clinicians need to improve how they 
educate  patients  about  their  medical  condition,  remove  the 
emphasis on verbal lines of transmission, support additional 
patient-expertise  searching,  and  ensure  patients  have  the 
confidence necessary to provide their own care without direct 
medical  supervision.  Finally,  utilization  of  one  or  more  of 
these  systems  will  require  that  hospital  staff  understand  the 
individual patient and his or her needs.  

and 

both 

individual- 

system-level 

For 
design 
recommendations, consideration of the KRS framework and 
how it supports self-management requires appropriate patient 
training and education. Knowledge, the most straightforward, 
requires  that  patients  gain  clinical  knowledge  and  patient 
expertise  required  to  engage  in  self-management  of  their 
illness.  Self-efficacy 
the 
confidence and motivation required to change their behaviors 
and  for  realistic  goal  setting.  Finally,  learning  appropriate 
problem-solving  and  decision-making  skills,  both  key  tasks 
in self-management [43,46], help individuals find and access 
social and structural resources needed to mange their health. 

that  patients  gain 

requires 

tailored 

information 

Traditional  hospital  educational  programs  that  only  transmit 
information,  which  is  usually  the  same  across  all  patients, 
should  be  replaced  with 
is 
appropriate for their cognitive development (e.g., toddler vs. 
older  adult)  to  support  active  learning.  Therefore,  designers 
should  explore  how  the  key  learning  principles  of  growth, 
diversity,  cognitive  development,  and  motivation  [56], 
support  the  cultivation  of  self-management  skills.  Hospital 
educational resources should therefore support  methods that 
incorporate  these  principles  to  support  patients  as  they 
prepare for hospital discharge. 

that 

Limitations and future work 
Although  our  work  provides  insight  into  the  challenges 
facing  patients  around  the  time  of  discharge  from  a 
hospitalization,  we  need  to  recognize  its  limitations.  Our 
sample  represents  the  patients  from  only  two  different 
institutions in a single metropolitan area in the United States. 
Although  both  institutions  provide  care  to  patients  from  a 
wide  geographic  area  and  diverse  sociocultural  and  medical 
backgrounds,  our  findings  may  not  be  generalizable  and 
therefore  should  be  validated  at  additional  institutions  and 
locations  within  and  beyond  the  United  States.  In  future 
work,  we  would  like  to  follow  patients  throughout  their 
hospitalization to understand how best to begin fostering self-
management.  Finally,  our  data  focused  exclusively  on 
patients  and  caregivers,  using  their  own  perspectives  and 
stories. Given the significant role hospital staff play in these 
issues,  they  should  be  included  in  future  studies,  not  just 
obtaining  their  perspective  on  the  challenges  related  to 
transitioning  to  self-management,  but  more  importantly  on 
the  development  and  validation  of  future  technological 
resources. 

to 

their 

illness 

CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we describe how patients discharged from the 
hospital  often  are  unprepared  as  they  transition  from 
hospitals  managing 
their  own  self-
management. We make three primary contributions. First, we 
show  that—despite  their  best  efforts—hospital  systems  do 
not  utilize  their  resources  in  ways  that  adequately  support 
patients during the transition period. In addition, we describe 
how patients lack the key elements of knowledge, resources, 
and  self-efficacy  required  for  self-management  outside  the 
hospital.  Finally,  we  outline  design  opportunities  for  new 
systems to support patients in their self-management journey. 
These  technological  opportunities  have  the  potential  to 
empower  patients,  affording  them  the  opportunity  to  focus 
less on living with an illness, and just living. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank our participants, who graciously gave us their time 
and  attention  during  their  hospital  stay.  We  thank  the 
Patients  as  Safeguards  team,  including  Barry  Aaronson, 
Shefali  Haldar,  Alex  Filipkowski,  Kelsey  Aiello,  and  Cory 
Brown. We also thank Virginia Mason and Seattle Children’s 
hospitals.  This  project  was  primarily  supported  by  grant 
#1R01HS022894  from  the  Agency  for  Healthcare  Research 
and Quality (AHRQ), with additional funding from the NIH 
National 
Training  Grant 
of  Medicine 
#T15LM007442.  

Library 

REFERENCES 
1.  Gregory D. Abowd and Elizabeth D. Mynatt. 2000. 

Charting past, present, and future research in ubiquitous 
computing. Transactions on Computer-Human 
Interaction (TOCHI) 7, 1: 29–58. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/344949.344988 

2.  David W. Baker, Julie A. Gazmararian, Mark V. 

Williams, et al. 2002. Functional health literacy and the 

Design for Health Care#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5333risk of hospital admission among Medicare managed 
care enrollees. American journal of public health 92, 8: 
1278–1283. 

3.  David W. Baker, Ruth M. Parker, Mark V. Williams, 
and W. Scott Clark. 1998. Health literacy and the risk 
of hospital admission. Journal of General Internal 
Medicine 13, 12: 791–798. 
http://doi.org/10.1046/j.1525-1497.1998.00242.x 
4.  Richard B. Balaban, Joel S. Weissman, Peter A. 

Samuel, and Stephanie Woolhandler. 2008. Redefining 
and redesigning hospital discharge to enhance patient 
care: a randomized controlled study. Journal of General 
Internal Medicine 23, 8: 1228–1233. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-008-0618-9 

5.  Albert Bandura. 1977. Self-efficacy: toward a unifying 
theory of behavioral change. Psychological Review 84, 
2: 191–215. http://doi.org/10.1016/0146-
6402(78)90002-4 

6.  Albert Bandura. 2004. Health Promotion by Social 

Cognitive Means. Health Education & Behavior 31, 2: 
143–164. http://doi.org/10.1177/1090198104263660 

14.  Kristin L. Carman, Pam Dardess, Maureen Maurer, et 
al. 2013. Patient and family engagement: a framework 
for understanding the elements and developing 
interventions and policies. Health Affairs (Project 
Hope) 32, 2: 223–231. 
http://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2012.1133 

15.  Richard Charlton, Michael B. Gravenor, Anwen Rees, 
et al. 2014. Factors associated with low fitness in 
adolescents - a mixed methods study. BMC Public 
Health 14, 1: 764. http://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2458-
14-764 

16.  Eun Kyoung Choe, Nicole B. Lee, Bonghin Lee, 

Wanda Pratt, and Julie A. Kientz. 2014. Understanding 
quantified-selfers' practices in collecting and exploring 
personal data. http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557372 

17.  James J. Cimino, G Elhanan, and Q Zeng. 1997. 

Supporting infobuttons with terminological knowledge. 
AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings: 528–532. 
18.  Andrea Civan and Wanda Pratt. 2007. Threading 

together patient expertise. AMIA Annual Symposium 
Proceedings: 140–144. 

7.  David M. Baorto and James J. Cimino. 2000. An 

19.  Andrea Civan-Hartzler, David W. McDonald, Chris 

8. 

9. 

“infobutton” for enabling patients to interpret on-line 
Pap smear reports. Proceedings / AMIA ... Annual 
Symposium. AMIA Symposium: 47–50. 
Julie Barlow, Chris Wright, Janice Sheasby, Andy 
Turner, and Jenny Hainsworth. 2002. Self-management 
approaches for people with chronic conditions: a 
review. Patient Education and Counseling 48, 2: 177–
187. 
Priscilla Barnes, Kelly Caine, Kay Connelly, and Katie 
Siek. 2013. Understanding the needs of low SES 
patients with type 2 diabetes. ICST (Institute for 
Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and 
Telecommunications Engineering). 
http://doi.org/10.4108/icst.pervasivehealth.2013.252153 
10.  Yoav Ben-Shlomo and Diana Kuh. 2002. A life course 
approach to chronic disease epidemiology: conceptual 
models, empirical challenges and interdisciplinary 
perspectives. International Journal of Epidemiology 31, 
2: 285–293. 

11.  Jochanan Benbassat and Mark Taragin. 2000. Hospital 
readmissions as a measure of quality of health care: 
advantages and limitations. Archives of Internal 
Medicine 160, 8: 1074–1081. 

12.  Thomas Bodenheimer, Kate Lorig, Halsted Holman, 

and Kevin Grumbach. 2002. Patient self-management 
of chronic disease in primary care. JAMA 288, 19: 
2469–2475. 

13.  Robert E. Burke, Ruixin Guo, Allan V. Prochazka, and 
Gregory J. Misky. 2014. Identifying keys to success in 
reducing readmissions using the ideal transitions in care 
framework. BMC Health Services Research 14, 1: 423. 
http://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-14-423 

Powell, Meredith M. Skeels, Marlee Mukai, and Wanda 
Pratt. 2010. Bringing the field into focus: user-centered 
design of a patient expertise locator.  ACM  Request 
Permissions, 1675–1684. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753577 

20.  Sunny Consolvo, Katherine Everitt, Ian Smith, and 

James A. Landay. 2006. Design requirements for 
technologies that encourage physical activity. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124840 

21.  Juliet M. Corbin and Anselm Strauss. 1988. Unending 
work and care: managing chronic illness at home. 
Jossey-Bass. 

22.  Anuj K. Dalal, Patricia C. Dykes, Sarah Collins, et al. 
2015. A web-based, patient-centered toolkit to engage 
patients and caregivers in the acute care setting: a 
preliminary evaluation. Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association : JAMIA: ocv093. 
http://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocv093 

23.  Patricia C. Dykes, Diana Stade, Frank Chang, et al. 

2014. Participatory Design and Development of a 
Patient-centered Toolkit to Engage Hospitalized 
Patients and Care Partners in their Plan of Care. 
Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium 2014: 486–495. 
24.  Geraldine Fitzpatrick and Gunnar Ellingsen. 2013. A 

Review of 25 Years of CSCW Research in Healthcare: 
Contributions, Challenges and Future Agendas. 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 22, 4-
6: 609–665. http://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-012-9168-0 
25.  Alan J. Forster, Harvey J. Murff, Josh F. Peterson, Tejal 

K. Gandhi, and David W. Bates. 2003. The incidence 
and severity of adverse events affecting patients after 
discharge from the hospital. Annals of Internal 

Design for Health Care#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5334Medicine 138, 3: 161–167. 

26.  Susannah Fox. 2011. The social life of health 

information, 2011. Pew internet & American life 
project. Retrieved from 
http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2011/Social‐Life‐of‐
Health‐Info.aspx 

27.  Peter G. Gibson, Heather Powell, Amanda J. Wilson, et 

al. 2002. Limited (information only) patient education 
programs for adults with asthma. The Cochrane 
database of systematic reviews, 2: CD001005. 
http://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD001005 
28.  Paul Glasziou, Les Irwig, and David Mant. 2005. 

Monitoring in chronic disease: a rational approach. 
BMJ (Clinical research ed.) 330, 7492: 644–648. 
http://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.330.7492.644 

29.  Luke O. Hansen, Robert S. Young, Keiki Hinami, 
Alicia Leung, and Mark V. Williams. 2011. 
Interventions to reduce 30-day rehospitalization: a 
systematic review. Annals of Internal Medicine 155, 8: 
520–528. http://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-155-8-
201110180-00008 

30.  Andrea Hartzler and Wanda Pratt. 2011. Managing the 

personal side of health: how patient expertise differs 
from the expertise of clinicians. Journal of Medical 
Internet Research 13, 3: e62. 
http://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.1728 

31.  Andrea L. Hartzler, Shomir Chaudhuri, Brett C. Fey, 
David R. Flum, and Danielle Lavallee. 2015. 
Integrating Patient-Reported Outcomes into Spine 
Surgical Care through Visual Dashboards: Lessons 
Learned from Human-Centered Design. eGEMs 3, 2: 
1133. http://doi.org/10.13063/2327-9214.1133 
32.  Vicki S. Helgeson and Sheldon Cohen. 1996. Social 
support and adjustment to cancer: reconciling 
descriptive, correlational, and intervention research. 
Health psychology: Official journal of the Division of 
Health Psychology, American Psychological 
Association 15, 2: 135–148. 

33.  James G. Hodge, Lawrence O. Gostin, and Peter D. 
Jacobson. 1999. Legal issues concerning electronic 
health information: privacy, quality, and liability. JAMA 
282, 15: 1466–1471. 

34.  Leora I. Horwitz, John P. Moriarty, Christine Chen, et 
al. 2013. Quality of discharge practices and patient 
understanding at an academic medical center. JAMA 
internal medicine 173, 18: 1715–1722. 
http://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.9318 
35.  Stephen F. Jencks, Mark V. Williams, and Eric A. 

Coleman. 2009. Rehospitalizations among patients in 
the Medicare fee-for-service program. The New 
England journal of medicine 360, 14: 1418–1428. 
http://doi.org/10.1056/NEJMsa0803563 

36.  Amber E. Johnson, L. Ebony Boulware, Cheryl A.M. 

Anderson, et al. 2014. Perceived barriers and 

facilitators of using dietary modification for CKD 
prevention among African Americans of low 
socioeconomic status: a qualitative study. BMC 
nephrology 15, 1: 194. http://doi.org/10.1186/1471-
2369-15-194 

37.  Shreya Kangovi, Frances K. Barg, Tamala Carter, et al. 

2014. Challenges faced by patients with low 
socioeconomic status during the post-hospital 
transition. Journal of General Internal Medicine 29, 2: 
283–289. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-013-2571-5 
38.  Julie A. Kientz. 2012. Embedded capture and access: 

encouraging recording and reviewing of data in the 
caregiving domain. 16, 2. 

39.  Amy J.H. Kind, Steve Jencks, Jane Brock, et al. 2014. 

Neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage and 30-day 
rehospitalization: a retrospective cohort study. Annals 
of Internal Medicine 161, 11: 765–774. 
http://doi.org/10.7326/M13-2946 

40.  Gina Koch, Bonnie J. Wakefield, and Douglas S. 

Wakefield. 2015. Barriers and facilitators to managing 
multiple chronic conditions: a systematic literature 
review. Western Journal of Nursing Research 37, 4: 
498–516. http://doi.org/10.1177/0193945914549058 

41.  Danielle C Lavallee, Paul Wicks, Rafael Alfonso 

Cristancho, and C. Daniel Mullins. 2014. Stakeholder 
engagement in patient-centered outcomes research: 
high-touch or high-tech? Expert Review of 
Pharmacoeconomics & Outcomes Research 14, 3: 335–
344. http://doi.org/10.1586/14737167.2014.901890 
Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A stage-
based model of personal informatics systems. ACM, 
New York, New York, USA. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753409 

42. 

43.  Kate R. Lorig and Halsted R. Holman. 2003. Self-

management education: History, definition, outcomes, 
and mechanisms. Annals of Behavioral Medicine 26, 1: 
1–7. http://doi.org/10.1207/S15324796ABM2601_01 

44.  Kate R. Lorig, Philip Ritter, Anita L. Stewart, et al. 
2001. Chronic disease self-management program: 2-
year health status and health care utilization outcomes. 
Medical Care 39, 11: 1217–1223. 

45.  Amgad N. Makaryus and Eli A. Friedman. 2005. 

Patients' understanding of their treatment plans and 
diagnosis at discharge. Mayo Clinic Proceedings 80, 8: 
991–994. http://doi.org/10.4065/80.8.991 

46.  Lena Mamykina, Arlene M. Smaldone, and Suzanne R. 

Bakken. 2015. Adopting the sensemaking perspective 
for chronic disease self-management. Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics 56, C: 406–417. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2015.06.006 

47.  Kenneth D. Mandl, Peter Szolovits, and Isaac S. Kohane. 
2001. Public standards and patients' control: how to keep 
electronic medical records accessible but private. BMJ 
(Clinical research ed.) 322, 7281: 283–287. 

Design for Health Care#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA533548.  Francisco Nunes, Nervo Verdezoto, Geraldine 

Fitzpatrick, Morten Kyng, Erik Grönvall, and Cristiano 
Storni. 2015. Self-Care Technologies in HCI: Trends, 
Tensions, and Opportunities. ACM Transactions on 
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 22, 6: 33–45. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2803173 

49.  Carla Parry, Heidi M. Kramer, and Eric A. Coleman. 
2006. A qualitative exploration of a patient-centered 
coaching intervention to improve care transitions in 
chronically ill older adults. Home Health Care Services 
Quarterly 25, 3-4: 39–53. 
http://doi.org/10.1300/J027v25n03_03 

50.  Laura M. Pfeifer and Timothy W. Bickmore. 2011. 
Longitudinal Remote Follow-Up by Intelligent 
Conversational Agents for Post-Hospitalization Care. 
AAAI Spring Symposium - Technical Report, SS-11-01, 
33-40. 

51.  Jenny Preece. 1998. Empathic communities: reaching 

out across the Web. interactions. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/274430.274435 

52.  Jane Sarasohn-Kahn. 2012. The wisdom of patients: 

Health care meets online social media. California 
HealthCare Foundation (2008). Retrieved from 
http://www.chcf.org/publications/2008/04/the-wisdom-
of-patients-health-care-meets-online-social-media 

53.  Sasha Shepperd, Natasha A. Lannin, Lindy M. 

Clemson, Annie McCluskey, Ian D. Cameron, and 
Sarah L. Barras. 2013. Discharge planning from 
hospital to home. The Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews 1: CD000313. 
http://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD000313.pub4 

54.  Meredith M. Skeels, Kenton T. Unruh, Christopher 
Powell, and Wanda Pratt. 2010. Catalyzing Social 
Support for Breast Cancer Patients. CHI ... conference 
proceedings / Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems. CHI Conference: 173–182. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753353 

55.  Brian K. Smith, Jeanna Frost, Meltem Albayrak, and 

Rajneesh Sudhakar. 2007. Integrating glucometers and 
digital photography as experience capture tools to 
enhance patient understanding and communication of 
diabetes self-management. Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing, 11(4), 273-286.  

56.  Elliot Soloway, Shari L. Jackson, Jonathan Klein, et al. 
1996. Learning theory in practice: case studies of 
learner-centered design. ACM, New York, New York, 
USA. http://doi.org/10.1145/238386.238476 

57.  Kelly D. Stamp, Monique A. Machado, and Nancy A. 
Allen. 2014. Transitional care programs improve 
outcomes for heart failure patients: an integrative 
review. The Journal of Cardiovascular Nursing 29, 2: 
140–154. 
http://doi.org/10.1097/JCN.0b013e31827db560 
58.  Cristiano Storni. 2015. Patients' lay expertise in chronic 
self-care: a case study in type 1 diabetes. Health 
expectations: An international journal of public 
participation in health care and health policy 18, 5: 
1439–1450. http://doi.org/10.1111/hex.12124 
59.  Amanda Third and Ingrid Richardson. 2010. 

Connecting, supporting and empowering young people 
living with chronic illness and disability: the livewire 
online community. Report prepared for the Starlight 
Children's Foundation. Retrieved from 
https://starlight.org.au/sites/all/tmp/files/200-
programs/Livewire-Online-Community-Research-
Project.pdf 

60.  Kenton T. Unruh, Meredith Skeels, Andrea Civan-

Hartzler, and Wanda Pratt. 2010. Transforming Clinic 
Environments into Information Workspaces for 
Patients. Human Factors in Computing Systems 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference, 183-192. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753354 

61.  Nienke van der Meulen, Jesse Jansen, Sandra van 

Dulmen, Jozien Bensing, and Julia van Weert. 2008. 
Interventions to improve recall of medical information 
in cancer patients: a systematic review of the literature. 
Psycho-oncology 17, 9: 857–868. 
http://doi.org/10.1002/pon.1290 

62.  Simone N. Vigod, Paul A. Kurdyak, Cindy-Lee Dennis, 
et al. 2013. Transitional interventions to reduce early 
psychiatric readmissions in adults: systematic review. 
The British Journal of Psychiatry : the journal of 
mental science 202, 3: 187–194. 
http://doi.org/10.1192/bjp.bp.112.115030 

63.  Lauren Wilcox, Janet Woollen, Jennifer Prey, et al. 

2015. Interactive Tools for Inpatient Medication 
Tracking: A Multi-Phase Study with Cardiothoracic 
Surgery Patients. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association: JAMIA. 
http://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocv160   

64.  Shuo Zhou, Timothy Bickmore, Michael Paasche-

Orlow, and Brian Jack. 2014. Agent-User Concordance 
and Satisfaction with a Virtual Hospital Discharge 
Nurse. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 8637, 528-
541. 

Design for Health Care#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5336 
 
