ConCap: Designing to Empower Individual Reﬂection on
Chronic Conditions using Mobile Apps
Harold Thimbleby
Future Interaction Laboratory
Swansea University
harold@thimbleby.net

Tom Owen, Jennifer Pearson
Future Interaction Laboratory
Swansea University
t.owen,j.pearson@swansea.ac.uk

George Buchanan
Centre for HCI Design
City University London
george.buchanan.1@city.ac.uk

ABSTRACT
The  world  is  faced  with  a  growing  number  of  people  who 
live  with  chronic  medical  conditions.  There  have  been  nu-
merous  digital  interventions  into  personal  management  of 
these  diseases  in  recent  years,  yet  gaps  remain  in  the  HCI 
literature.  In  particular,  we  lack  a  systematic  understand-
ing  of  user  requirements  in  tools  that  support  independent 
management while away from external inﬂuences.  This pa-
per presents a ﬁrst investigation into low-intervention support 
for self-management. A mobile application enabled individu-
als to capture contextual information related to their health in 
the form of photographs.  Through a month-long user study, 
we identify four management trends amongst our participants 
and describe their inﬂuence on mobile application adoption.

Author Keywords
Health care; chronic disease management; ubiquitous 
computing; deployment studies; diabetes

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.m.  Information  Interfaces  and  Presentation  (e.g.  HCI):
Miscellaneous

INTRODUCTION
The HCI community is increasingly engaged with investigat-
ing requirements and designs for digital healthcare. This ﬁeld 
can directly impact people’s lives,  with tangible beneﬁts for 
individuals. The existing research in this domain has emerged 
into three broad strands, which demark different approaches 
to the role of digital systems in an individual’s health.
The  ﬁrst,  and  perhaps  predominant  approach  is  the  use  of 
‘persuasive’  or  ‘nudge’  interactions  that  encourage  patients 
to adhere to speciﬁc behaviours that contribute to good health 
(e.g.,  [2,  21]).  This  theme  beneﬁts  from  a  wider  contem-
porary interest in persuasive interaction and ‘nudge’ in HCI 
generally. There is also a clear potential beneﬁt in helping in-
dividuals take speciﬁc actions that are likely to improve their 
wellbeing. However, there can be concerns that this technique 
necessarily  imposes  normalised  models  that  may  be  a  poor

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for  personal  or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page.  Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than 
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
MobieHCI’15, August 24 - 27, 2015, Copenhagen, Denmark
Copyright  c(cid:13) 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3652-9/15/08...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2785830.2785881

clinical match to an individual patient, and that in the long-
term, maintenance of new behaviours can fail. This style of
research relies on encoding guidance or advice from medical
experts into tools, games or other interactive experiences that
encourage adoption of the expert opinion.

A sharply different, but complementary, technique is remote
monitoring. These place the clinical expert in a central
role. Records of the patient’s clinical readings, or their be-
haviour, are ﬁrst gathered via sensors and telecommunication
(e.g., [16]). Expert(s) then review the data, diagnose prob-
lems, respond to critical events, or provide tailored guidance.
This approach brings the patient closer to clinical expertise,
and enhances treatment by improved information gathering
and targetted advice. There are countervailing concerns that
the high level of monitoring can appear intrusive, or increase
conﬂict between a patient and clinician, if the level of advice
is found to be overly prescriptive. The scalability of the costs
inherent in this approach, particularly of the availability of
sufﬁcient volumes of expertise, is also a key practical issue.

Our own research follows a third tradition, which seeks to en-
able individual management of a patient’s condition. This po-
tentially avoids the costly routine involvement of clinicians,
but can also enable a more detailed discussion between pa-
tient and clinician when required. The sense of intrusion
or compulsion in the other two routes can also be avoided.
However, the technique does not directly address the issue
of conformance that typically underpin the research in ei-
ther persuasion or remote monitoring. This setting of health-
management has been labelled as ‘unanchored’ [13], as it is
detached from the inﬂuences of external actors.

The smartphone has transformed the research landscape
across all these approaches, reducing the need for traditional
PCs. While some substantial research has been undertaken
in the both persuasive and remote monitoring techniques, the
third, self-management, ﬁeld lags behind in terms of both re-
search and practice in the current technological environment.

Diabetes is a chronic condition that affects millions of peo-
ple worldwide. It has been estimated that in 2000, 2.8% of
the world’s populace were sufferers [29]. The prevalence of
diabetes is expected to rise to 4.4% by 2030, due to the in-
creasing number of older and obese individuals. This equates
to the worldwide population with diabetes rising from 171
to 366 million. The increasing impact of chronic conditions
such as diabetes, makes it timely to further investigate the po-
tential for mobile devices to support their management.

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark105This paper presents an investigation into effective design
within the domain of chronic condition management in unan-
chored settings. The longitudinal deployment of ConCap, a
mobile app, uncovers the contexts where taking photographs
proved an effective tool for reﬂection for those with diabetes.
Participants highlighted the challenges of using mobile inter-
ventions in everyday social situations, and demonstrated how
mobile apps ﬁt into existing management strategies.

BACKGROUND
Chronic conditions are a matter rising concern for many
health organisations. The World Health Organisation esti-
mated that in 2008 these conditions accounted for 36 million
deaths globally [24]. The management of chronic conditions
is a major societal challenge, and HCI can make a substantial
contribution. Though the ﬁeld is young, there are already a
number of diverging approaches to HCI in the domain.

The ‘Patient Empowerment’ [8] movement has seen practi-
tioners attempt to move patients from being ‘passive recipi-
ents of services’ to ‘being active and self-determining parts
of their healthcare’ [23]. The aim is to ensure that patients
are more prominently involved in their own treatment, from
decision-making to an increased role in daily maintenance.

Patients with chronic conditions are no longer simply given
regimes they must follow to manage their condition. Instead,
clinicians aim to provide individuals with problem-solving
skills that relate speciﬁcally to their circumstances [3]. By
enabling patients to solve problems that they encounter, they
can take more complete control of their condition and become
a key decision-maker in their treatment. Patient input into
their own medical records is also being explored [28].

Patients who have been managing chronic conditions are
likely to have formed their own routines and habits as part of
their management [20]. These habits then provide individu-
als with reassurance and predictability, while also potentially
allowing for tight control over their condition. However dis-
rupting good routines by introducing technology may cause a
lack of uptake in their usage due to a break in routine. Adding
in a large scale tertiary device seems inappropriate and per-
haps, interventions must be made on a smaller scale.

Chronic Condition Management
Researchers in mobile interaction have already investigated
the speciﬁc needs of patients with diabetes. The key research
is from Mamykina et al. [17]. Their initial research focussed
on enabling those with diabetes reﬂect on their condition,. In
later work, they [16] used a mobile intervention to allow for
people with diabetes to gather data about their condition for
the purpose of feedback from peers and clinicians.

Their system, MAHI, captured data on mobile phones, lead-
ing to, separate management tasks using desktop PCs. It was
well received in use, and the recorded information was in
keeping with the participants’ existing monitoring. The un-
derlying interest in patients’ management of their conditions
presents the closest existing research to our own. However,
we aim to understand how modern mobile technology can

support self-reﬂection in the management of diabetes, inde-
pendently of the desktop. MAHI predated the smartphone,
and used a limited range of mobile interaction. There is a
vast scope for more sophisticated and usable interventions.

One speciﬁc approach that has been attempted to capture rich
information in a lightweight form was to use photo imagery
alongside glucose reading results. Mamykina et al introduced
the use of photographs, which they only reported in summary
form (e.g. the number of pictures taken). Smith and Frost [26]
took a more speciﬁc approach, associating images of food
with glucose levels. They visualised a timeline of images and
glucose results, which had been colour-coded based on their
likely contribution to health. However, Smith et al used desk-
top PCs, and we [20] have demonstrated that this can lead to
low levels of capture and reﬂection. The use of photographs
for reﬂection is thus ripe for further investigation, to iden-
tify if ‘casual’ photography can genuinely help those with a
chronic condition understand and manage their disease.

It has been noted that clinical success should not be the
only measure of an appropriate personal healthcare interven-
tion [1]. The considerations of how technology may impact
on a persons everyday life are also critical. Previous HCI
work has adopted this stance, to allow individuals to share
experiences that are richer than bare health data. Personal re-
ﬂections have been added to medical data capture [10, 18].
Wagner et al. [27] suggest that the management of chronic
conditions is multi faceted: made up of a variety of stakehold-
ers who assist in an individuals’ own personal management.
By providing the capability to capture wider forms of infor-
mation, a more complete picture of an individuals’ current
state of management can be determined by the stakeholders.

Previous work has sought to enhance the ability of individu-
als to collate health information for dissemination to various
external stakeholders. We believe there is currently an oppor-
tunity to provide further support when individuals are away
from external sources, or perhaps do not wish to share partic-
ular parts of their recorded data. It is in this space where we
position our research, while additionally considering how to
provide a platform for sustained engagement from users.

Personal Health Informatics
The gathering and reﬂection on information to control a
chronic condition can also be understood as a form of per-
sonal informatics. When studying those gathering “quanti-
ﬁed self” data, Choe et al report that 35% of their respondents
gathered data about their health [6]. While we do not know
how many of their respondents had a chronic condition, that
work clearly demonstrates the frequency of the gathering of
health data generally. Li et al [14] introduce a model that di-
vides this process into different stages, from preparation to
reﬂection. One issue with this model from the perspective of
chronic management is that, in contrast to Mamykina’s [17]
and our [20] models, it focuses on data gathering, and plays
less attention to reﬂection: which is addressed in one, rather
than several steps, of the process.

The use of photographs as a speciﬁc form of capturing data
about food is also established. Beside’s Mamykina’s work,

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark106Cordiero et al [7] have recently focussed on the topic of
photo-journaling food as a general phenomenon, often tied
to attempts to measure healthy eating or general wellbeing.
However, as we noted previously [20]. and indeed Cordeiro
reiterates, this is an unreliable method for gathering diagnos-
tic and speciﬁc data such as calorie intake. Those focussing
on diabetes research have progressed to analysing not only
energy intake, but also energy consumption (e.g. exercise),
personal context (e.g. stress, illness) and environmental is-
sues (e.g. weather, stress at work).

MOTIVATION
People with diabetes need to carefully control the level of glu-
cose in their blood. Patients use one or more glucose-meters
to identify their current glucose level. Based on this informa-
tion, adjustments to diet or exercise can ensure that the read-
ing remains in, or returns to, the ideal range. Effective man-
agement includes the prediction of future changes, in light of
anticipated eating and exercise. Patients must therefore anal-
yse multiple, conﬂicting factors, to predict the response of
their glucose levels in different contexts.

Our research builds on earlier studies of the monitoring needs
of people with diabetes. Previous work has been based on
pre-conceived regimens of ideal monitoriing practices.
In
contrast, we wanted to undertake the ﬁrst study that elic-
its what self-directed behaviours emerge when users work
“unanchored”, independent of clinical or peer oversight. As
we shall see, there are a number of different strategies, from
strict regimens to more ﬂexible, responsive plans.

To represent how a mobile application for diabetes may be
used in daily life, we developed a potential usage scenario
based on prior research [17, 16, 20]. The usage scenario was
used to guide the design of the ConCap application.

Lucy has had type 1 diabetes for 15 years and typically
checks her glucose value four times a day. She has re-
cently decided to start attending the gym, in an effort to
improve her ﬁtness. Unsure of how the increased level
of exercise will impact on her need for insulin, she be-
gins to keep a record of her glucose scores and location
on her mobile phone. Using this data, she can correlate
the occasions that she was at the gym and how much
it affects her glucose scores. She can then make more
accurate future decisions about how much insulin is re-
quired on days she attends the gym.

While the scenario suggests how applications may be used in
a real world setting, the expected outcomes are not compre-
hensive. There are likely to be many individual approaches to
personal condition management. Therefore, accurately pre-
dicting how the application may be used is perhaps unfea-
sible. Yet, the scenarios provide a crucial link back to the
research conducted previously. The design of the application
relied heavily on both the previous literature in the area and
the data gathered from the previous research [17, 20].

We undertook a longitudinal study to obtain concrete data on
the use of ConCap in real-world settings. Data on long-term
use of management tools is still sparse, and it is unclear how

an tool such as ConCap will be accepted into the daily habits
of people with diabetes. The study will reveal if apps like
ConCap can assist people with diabetes manage their condi-
tion. Furthermore, unanchored strategies are undocumented:
how tools for independent management are accepted and used
is not known. Finally, a mobile, unanchored system may re-
veal previously unknown behaviours.

Previous work on supporting individual well-being has
largely focused on systems that require external interventions
from clinicians or family members. In contrast, we know lit-
tle of how mobile applications can support self-management
of personal health information. It is clear that people with dia-
betes often have to deal with challenging situations outside of
clinical appointments. In these cases, termed “unanchored”
settings, individuals have to calculate their own treatment de-
cisions based on current, and past information.

The motivation behind our research therefore, is twofold.
Firstly, the primary aim of the research is to approach an un-
derstanding of how mobile interventions can support man-
agement of health information. Secondly, the study sets out
to contribute additional knowledge to the domain of mobile
well-being support without external intervention.

SYSTEM DESIGN
ConCap is a mobile app that allows a user to enter glucose
scores and insulin units, and present the information as a
graph. ConCap also allows photographs to be taken using
a phone’s built-in camera, and gather location information
which is presented as a map snapshot. Rich media such as
images and location have been shown to be help users in pre-
vious self-reﬂection systems [9, 22]. However, most systems
were not focused on chronic disease management.

Within the domain of managing chronic conditions, systems
that support images have required desktop PCs [26, 15]. Im-
ages were therefore captured on cameras and phones before
being collated on a central device. ConCap allows users to
take photos using their mobile phone’s camera. Even so, in-
cluding images in diabetes management tools has been been
positively received by users [26]. ConCap allows the images
captured by users to be automatically stored and displayed
alongside the health data entered on one mobile device.

As well as including imagery data, ConCap can also capture
a user’s location at regular intervals during the day. Location
data has been seen as a useful tool in pervasive health appli-
cations [12]. In principle, users can trackl thir location across
a period of time, which in turn may allow them to recall what
activities were performed: e.g. if an application indicates that
a user had been close to a gym address, the user may then be
able to recall that they had performed an hour of exercise.

The ConCap application was not designed to replace partic-
ipants’ existing management patterns, or to provide clinical
assistance.
Instead, ConCap acts as a platform to capture
daily activities and to display information relevant to diabetes
management. The aim of ConCap was to assist in trend-
spotting, and understanding of causes of glucose scores by
capturing daily activities through imagery data, and act as a
supplementary glucose reading logging tool.

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark107database that stored values throughout the application. This
database, along with images captured, was retrieved at the
end of the study. This data makes it possible to assess what
factors participants considered to be important to the manage-
ment of their condition. Participant consent was sought be-
fore accessing images taken using the application. To protect
anonymity, the names that appear below have been changed.

Smartphones, while common, are not used by everyone. To
avoid learning effects and general unfamiliarity with devices,
only experienced users of mobile phones were recruited. Al-
though these technologies afford individuals an opportunity
to increase their health literacy, a minimum level of proﬁ-
ciency is necessary before users can effectively use the sys-
tem resources to manage their illness [11].

To ensure participants remained engaged across the study,
regular contact ‘checkpoints’ were used. In addition to entry
(start of week 1) and exit interviews (end of week 4), con-
tact was made with participants at the end of weeks 1 to 3.
The weekly contact involved short telephone conversations,
arranged at a time convenient to the participant and in all ex-
cept one case, exactly seven days after the previous contact.

Throughout the course of the study, participants were in-
formed that any subject they are not comfortable with dis-
cussing would be omitted from the study, and that they was
no expectation to discuss embarrassing topics. We explained
that the study was not an evaluation on their ability or knowl-
edge, instead it was an evaluation of the impact the applica-
tion may have on the management of their condition.

At the exit interview, we elicited the participants’ general us-
age of ConCap and the photos they took during the study.
Throughout the interviews, note-taking and audio recording
were used to capture data. Permission was requested for au-
dio recording for the purpose of later analysis.

Participants
A total of 12 participants were recruited for the study, all
of whom had had type 1 diabetes for a period of 2 years or
longer. Type 1 diabetes is a condition where a person’s pan-
creas does not produce insulin, meaning there is no means to
break down the glucose in the body.

There were 7 female and 5 male participants, whose ages
ranged from 21 - 56 (average age of 32.25). They had lived
with diabetes for a total of 201 years (mean=18.27, sd = 10.4).
All of the participants were regular users of glucose monitor-
ing devices, and had regularly used Android for at least one
year, with current access to an Android phone. A summary
of the participants, is presented in Table 1.

Analysis
The interview sessions formed the primary area of analy-
sis, with each serving different purposes. The entry session
elicited each individual’s existing attitudes and management
practices of diabetes. The exit interview sessions were used
to query participants regarding their usage of the ConCap ap-
plication during the four-week long study period.

Notes were taken throughout each interview, capturing im-
portant pieces of information, and recording key moments to

Figure 1. Screenshot ConCap app. The home screen of the app displays
input information on a timeline. Icons at the top provide navigation to
functions such as input of information and settings.

The main screen of the application is shown in Figure 1: the
displayed graph makes use of the achartengine 1 open source
graphing library for Android. The thumbnail images can be
made full screen by pressing on thumbnail itself.

DEPLOYMENT STUDY
The aim of our research is to discover the user behaviours and
needs with mobile self-management tools. While studies of
persuasive and remote monitoring systems have increasingly
captured user behaviour over several weeks, there is a lack of
comparable data for self-management tools.

As we were primarily concerned with longer-term use, we
followed the diary study approach reported by Carter and
Mankoff [5] to achieve extended, indirect, observation of nat-
ural behaviour. The lack of existing software in common use
led us to provide a platform for participants to capture their
own experiences in managing their condition. We used three
sources of data – interviews, application logs and images – to
allow for contextualisation of data in our analysis [25].

Study Methodology
To understand the impact of ConCap on how users managed
their diabetes, a four-week user study was conducted.

Procedure
Participants were recruited through an email call to local Di-
abetes Support groups and sessions were organised either
through similar correspondence, or through telephone con-
versations. As incentive for taking part in the study, partici-
pants were offered a sum of £114 for completion of the whole
4 weeks. This was broken down into two £7 payments for
completing the interview sessions, and four payments of £25
for each week of using the ConCap application.

Participants were asked to use the application to both enter
data (such as glucose scores and taking pictures) and reﬂect
on the data presented back to them (e.g. location and images).
Data collection across the in-situ study was obtained from a

1achartengine available at http://www.achartengine.org/

Photo thumbnailInsulin doseLocation recordedGlucose readingsFunction buttons(GI,Dose,Photo,Loc.)Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark108Insulin
Pump

Records

Sex Age

Time
with
Diabetes
20 yrs
27 yrs
18 yrs
7 yrs
21 yrs
12 yrs
44 yrs
22 yrs
13 yrs
7 yrs
15 yrs
17 yrs

Joe
No
Naira
No
Sarah
No
Paul
Yes
John
Yes
Hayley
No
Matt
Yes
Ruth
No
Julie
No
Holly
No
Lauren
No
Mark
No
Table 1. Details of participants at the start of the study period.

Yes
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No

37
28
44
37
34
27
56
25
23
21
28
27

M
F
F
M
M
F
M
F
F
F
F
M

Glucose

Insulin

C a m era

L ocation

Joe
Naira
Sarah
Paul
John
Hayley
Matt
Ruth
Julie
Holly
Lauren
Mark

57
48
134
41
14
20
103
34
11
82
45
6
Table 2. Entries into the ConCap application during the study period.

57
118
141
38
49
264
116
41
13
72
62
40

6
2
33
35
9
5
4
28
0
7
10
5

0
3
12
20
9
1
10
32
0
8
10
1

return to with the audio recording. Upon completion of the
study, the ﬁrst step in processing the data was to return to the
notes to gain a brief understanding of how each participant
used the ConCap application. The audio recordings of the in-
terview sessions were reviewed to gain further insights, and
double-check of the accuracy of the notes. Exact quotations
were also transcribed from the relevant audio recordings.

ConCap also logged a variety of information during the study,
allowing veriﬁcation of participant’s reports. The application
recorded all of the glucose and insulin information entered,
the images taken, and locations noted. From this captured
data, participants’ daily interactions with the application were
determined. The application also logged instances when par-
ticipants opened the application without entering any data.
This provided a database with a set of log data which en-
abled triangulation with reported incidents and behaviours
discussed by participants in the interview sessions.

RESULTS
Over the four-week study, participants entered a signiﬁcant
amount of data: 1011 glucose and 595 insulin enteries, 106
photos taken and 144 locations tagged. The daily averages
were: glucose 36.61, insulin 21.25, images 3.79 and 5.14
locations. Unfortunately, data from Holly was partially lost
from their ConCap database: we presented here the remaining
information from her device, plus her interview responses.

Participant Contexts
Based on the information gathered in the entry and exit in-
terviews, the participants were categorised into groups based
on the current state of their health information management.
Two main alternatives were ‘Standard’ conditions, where
the participant’s condition and practices were stable, versus,
’Change’ conditions where the overall pattern was in the pro-
cess of adjustment. This further broke down into standard
(rigid), standard (ﬂuctuating), change (voluntary) and change
(forced), which we will now describe in further detail:

Standard - Rigid - Participants within this pool were deter-
mined to be at a phase of their management in which their
condition was largely stable, due to their own strict control of

factors. These factors include typically; the choice of food,
times of meals and portion sizes. The participants assigned
to this category were Joe and Ruth, who both described ex-
tremely tight glucose control through their planning and mon-
itoring of a variety of activities.

Standard - Fluctuating - Individuals in this class are satis-
ﬁed with their health status, yet experience moments of uncer-
tainty in areas such a special events that disrupt the norm. The
participants in this category were Sarah, Paul, John, Matt,
Holly and Mark. Those in this category all expressed being
largely happy with their control, but still experienced some
areas of concern, such as Paul who had noticed an increase in
his glucose levels and was determining what action to take.

Change - Voluntary - Those who are going through a change
in either their condition or management through a choice that
they have made. The participants in this category were Naira,
Hayley and Lauren. Hayley, for example, had recently made
the decision to try for a baby which required her to increase
the level of control she had previously been performing.

Change - Forced - Those who are experiencing change which
is out of their control, such as Julie who had to change treat-
ment halfway through study and moved onto an insulin pump.
Change was known before entry into study and likely ex-
plained low number of interactions early on, before a change
in medication was required by their clinicians. The only par-
ticipant included in this category is Julie, due to her change
of treatment plan during the study.

These groups had distinct approaches to using ConCap, and
they will be referred to throughout the rest of this paper.

Images Captured
Participants used the camera feature on the application to de-
pict several different situations. Understanding the types of
images taken will help reveal the scenarios where images are
most helpful in the context of chronic disease management.

All of the images from participants’ devices were collected
and individually coded for what it depicted (e.g., a plate of

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark109food as seen in Figure 4 was labelled as ‘food and drink’).
Four primary categories of images emerged: food and drink,
location, scene and physical artefact.

Food and Drink - Based on previous research [26] partici-
pants were informed at the start of the study that images of
food may be helpful. All of the participants recruited for the
study took at least one picture that ﬁts into this category.

Location - Rather than use the location maps offered on the
application, several participants took pictures of their sur-
roundings to represent where they had been during a day. This
was the most prominent method of capturing location, poten-
tially due to participants’ ability to contextualise a picture in
a much more meaningful way than simply a map.

Scene - Scenes were speciﬁc events that happened during the
study that didn’t simply match the location category. Lauren’s
barbecue picture (Figure 3a), was not just about place, and
similarly, Ruth took pictures of her bedsheets in the morning.
This was so she knew that her tests had been taken at home,
and the photo represented the time the tests were taken (i.e.,
on waking or before breakfast).

Physical Artifact - Participants also took pictures of objects
that they felt were relevant to their condition. For example,
Figure 2b displays a match ticket, representing a entire day
of activity. Similarly, Paul captured his own monitor screen
whilst he was having a hypoglycaemic episode.

Changes in Management
By using the ConCap application, two participants were able
to make notable differences to their management. Matt stated
that his average glucose level had dropped half a point during
the month. Holly noticed a trend in her daily glucose levels
that had previously gone unnoticed. When designing the ap-
plication, tangible impact on participants’ health had not been
considered achievable. Yet, our low impact intervention ap-
pears to have increased the ability of participants to manage
and interpret their information in a meaningful way.

Frequency of Use
The approach taken to entering information into the applica-
tion was varied across all of the participants, with the two
primary methods of entering information being: at the time
of a reading, and bulk inputs at set periods of time.

For eight participants, their use of ConCap was sustained
across the four weeks, with no notable or statistically sig-
niﬁcant changes occurring. In contrast, four participants de-
scribed how their interactions with the application had de-
creased over the study period. The reasons given for the de-
crease appear to correlate with the current behaviours of the
participants reported in their entry interview.

The “standard-rigid” group all showed declining use. Ruth
was one example, stating in her exit intervew that she rarely
recorded her glucose results, and that the novelty of using
the application had worn off during the study period. How-
ever, this should not be a surprise, as those with highly struc-
tured and predictable routines are unlikely to beneﬁt strongly

from self-reﬂection. Even for those with rising use, integra-
tion could be a problem were routines were highly developed.

John, in the “standard ﬂuctuating” group, had only 13 uses in
the ﬁrst week, but rose to 42 in the ﬁnal week. His logging
of glucose increased across the study, while his use of lo-
cation and photographs remained consistent throughout. He
reﬂected that he had used paper records for over 13 years, and
altering that habit over 4 weeks was a challenge.

Those in the standard ﬂuctuating or change groups used Con-
cap more. When in intensive stages of monitoring, or engag-
ing in ‘unusual’ activities, more data was captured: e.g. Naira
and Lauren (Change, voluntary), Matt and Sarah (standard,
ﬂuctuating) each showed rising use in these contexts.

Occasions of Use
There were two recurring patterns that related to the moment
of ConCap’s use. The ﬁrst was almost universal, whereas the
second occurred most frequently in the change groups.

Almost every participant said that they were more likely to
use the photograph and location functions during times that
they were engaging in activities that were beyond their usual
routine. These events often occurred at weekends. Activities
such as eating out, alcohol consumption and increased physi-
cal activities triggered greater use of the application.

More routine events were also captured, particularly when
control was a concern. During the initial interview, Lau-
ren highlighted a recurring problem with minor daily hypo-
glycaemic episodes at mid-morning. The intermittent nature
of the episodes made arriving at a correct insulin dose each
day difﬁcult. She speculated that her daily commute into her
workplace was a key factor. Her work was in two different
sites which she alternated between on different days. One of-
ﬁce required her to walk to the workplace, and Lauren felt
that might be contributing to her recurrent problems in the
mornings. To capture these instances during the study, Lau-
ren took pictures of pavements. These images represented the
days on which she walked into work, allowing her to conﬁrm
the correlation between days she had walked to work and days
in which she had low blood sugars.

EMERGING THEMES
Through our analysis of the ConCap data and feedback re-
ceived from our participants, similarities emerged between
individuals. This section describes the key themes that arose.

Exceptions
All but two participants captured events that broke their regu-
lar routine. Capturing unusual events was seen as important in
pre-empting potential unusual readings later in the day. Lau-
It ﬁrst appeared
ren photographed a barbecue (Figure 3a).
that this image had been taken to show that Lauren was eat-
ing food that was atypical, and might need to be considered in
later reﬂection. However in interview she explained that the
image was taken to show the irregular manner in which she
had eaten. Food at barbecues typically comes in small, infre-
quent batches. Lauren was capturing her eating in bursts, with
gaps of 15-30 minutes, rather than a larger amount within

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark110(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)

Figure 2. (a) Matt’s image of home decorating equipment, representing
increased physical activity (b) Matt took a picture of a Rugby match
ticket, capturing a day of increased walking, alcohol and fast food.

Figure 3. (a) Lauren captured an image at a barbecue to represent the
small, irregular intakes of food likely to complicate insulin dosing. (b)
Lauren usually took public transport to work, but sometimes walked.
To illustrate these days, she took pictures of street pavements.

a condensed period of time. This pattern makes calculating
insulin injections challenging, and Lauren had marked this
event to help her understand her glucose trend that day.

Habits and Routines
As seen in previous literature ([17, 20]), those engaging in di-
abetes self-management are likely to form methods to control
their condition, which they implement recurrently. This was
seen in the two “standard” groups, for whom a new interven-
tion interrupted their routine, and consequently part of these
groups struggled to integrate ConCap into their management.

Paul: “I didn’t use it that often, but occasionally when
something interesting happened I took a photo.”

John: “I think it takes a bit more time for something like
this to become part of a routine, I have been using paper
and an insulin pump since 2001.”

Conversely, Lauren was tring to get into a habit of walking,
and so was altering her routine. This increased physical ac-
tivity was not yet routine, and Lauren was experiencing great
variation in her glucose readings. As noted above, to help
her analysis, she tagged the occasions she walked to work by
taking pictures of the pavement on her route. This allowed
her to correlate between her walking and glucose levels, and
in turn adjust her insulin dosing. It appears then, that during
moments of change ConCap was able to assist in the under-
standing of the impact new factors were likely to have.

Reﬂection
Support for reﬂection was a common requirement we encoun-
tered in our earlier research on diabetes self-management.
Two thirds of the participants, none of whom were in the
Standard/Stable condition, reported that ConCap was help-
ful in acquiring some understanding of their condition. The
underlying reﬂection was helped in several different ways:

Sarah was the only participant who stated that the graph pro-
vided her with a sense of satisfaction in her diabetes con-
trol. But, the graph also highlighted points where her glucose
scores were not so well controlled.

In order to distinguish glucose readings taken before and af-
ter breakfast, Ruth took several images which represented
Scenes. She typically captured images of bedsheets illus-
trated where she was at the time of taking a reading. There-
fore, the bedsheets were designed to show that she was still
in bed in the morning and had not yet got out of bed to have
breakfast. The image had now added an extra layer of con-
text to the morning glucose results, and allowed to quickly
distinguish results for the purpose of later understanding.

Ruth typically used the location and the photographs at the
same time, but felt that the location information provided lit-
tle insight. Ruth attributed this to the fact that that she was
usually at her desk or at home, and as such location informa-
tion didn’t offer any additional insight.

“I generally took pictures of what I ate, or where I was
so I could look back and remind myself where I was when
I took a reading.”

Ruth thus appears to have used the application to capture set-
tings where she had taken a glucose reading, rather than cap-
turing daily activities when they happened.

Holly highlighted that she took pictures if she went out for
dinner, or a coffee. These events are outside her routine, and
typically occurred at weekends, leading to more photography:

“If I can see a picture of what I have eaten it gives me a
better idea of what my blood sugars are doing and why.”

Sarah: “Sometimes when things are going well, you
don’t really realise it. When you see it on the graph,
you are kind of pleased with yourself.”

“I had a couple of hypos and I looked back at the pho-
tographs and saw that I had a coffee and a mufﬁn and
had really overestimated the insulin.”

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark111By using the photographs in this manner, Holly was able to
determine that she had incorrectly calculated a dosage of in-
sulin. During the exit interview, Holly highlighted this issue
with little prompting, suggesting that by viewing the glucose
and insulin values alongside an image of the food, she had a
distinct memory of the event. It is possible then, that ConCap
can facilitate reﬂective learning around speciﬁc events.

Environmental Factors in Capture
During entry interviews, the performing medical tasks in a
public setting was highlighted as a concern. The process of
piercing skin for a glucose reading, or carrying out injections
for insulin, were described as socially awkward. Participants
expressed similar, if lesser, concerns with mobile phones.
Mark described not making use of the photo feature while us-
ing the bathroom (which he used for glucose tests to prevent
people seeing, as per O’Kane [19]), who dubs this problem
Unexpected Social Situations. Sarah also commented on the
challenge of ensuring data entry during social situations:

“I entered results every time, except when it was rude to
get my phone out then I would retrospectively add them.”

DISCUSSION
The entry interviews conﬁrmed that few participants regularly
logged their health information (3 of 14). Those who regu-
larly logged were the also most frequent users of ConCap.

Previous research has shown the value of “anchored” man-
agement, supported by analysis from experts [16, 26]. Con-
tinuous use was associated with superior management, and
seen as a positive sign of acceptance. However, our study
shows that when the focus is shifted from anchored, moni-
tored, compliance, this pattern of behaviour is displaced.

Nearly half of the participants felt that they would struggle
to use ConCap concurrently over a substantial period of time
(2 rarely, 4 periodically). They were content in their current
management and knowledge, and found a personal balance
between rigorous inspection of results and ‘getting on with
life’. These respondents were in our “standard” groups, with
either rigid regimes or limited ﬂuctuation.

In contrast, those facing change or high ﬂuctuation within a
standard control, found great beneﬁt in ConCap. Matt, who
had an established regime, but higher ﬂuctuations, credited a
fall in his weekly averages – by 0.5mmol/L – to new insights
found through ConCap. Matt’s use of the imagery feature in
the application was perhaps also the most interesting with his
ability to capture complex events in a single picture.

Our distinction between current health contexts proved crit-
ical in understanding the relative utility both of ConCap as
a whole, and individual features. Neither MAHI [16], nor
Vera [2] report such distinctions. Each user’s current health
context drove their adoption or disinterest in ConCap, and it
appears both plausible and likely that rising concern leads to
higher use for monitoring interventions more generally.

Capture and Access
Participants are engaging in capture, following the criteria
laid out by Brown et al. [4]; to archive, to collect and collate,

Figure 4. Naira captured an image of a Thai takeaway. The image as-
sisted in the understanding of the impact the type of food had on blood
glucose levels and insulin requirements.

to read and reﬂect, to re-use and share. Each of these criteria
were observable in our participants’ interactions with Con-
Cap. While it was intended that the application was purely
for self-management, Naira reported using the data gathered
with her clinician during subsequent appointments. Naira
also highlighted a point where ConCap gave her new insight:

“For instance, one time I had Thai and took too much
insulin. The next time I had Thai I knew to take less.
I’ve got it now, I have sussed it out.”

The participants thus used the information ConCap collected
for various reasons and in different ways. Our adoption of a
lightweight tool for information gathering appears to have fa-
cilitated greater capture in those in both Standard/Fluctuating
and Change/Voluntary stages. Those who in the other two
categories felt that even a low-impact intervention was an un-
necessary additional level of management.

Illustrating Points of Interest
The MAHI study [16] provided only a limited overview of
the use of photographs. Vera [2] investigated the social in-
teractions that arose as a result of sharing photographs with
others. Neither investigated individual use of photographs,
and neither assessed the content of the photographs.

The primary aim of the inclusion of location and camera im-
ages in the application was to provide participants with a
quick method of capturing a moment they felt was relevant
to their condition. Location information illustrated a trace of
where people had been throughout the day, and images visu-
ally displayed events that a participant had engaged in.

While the camera and location use were similar, The camera
received more praise in the exit interviews.
Inherent limi-
tations in GPS positioning may have been a factor, but the
ability for participants to capture what they felt was relevant,
in a fashion they understood, appeared to be a bigger inﬂu-
ence. Location data was relatively limited, but pictures could
capture both simple and complex situations. Matt highlighted
that a day of home improvement is not easily translated into
corresponding adjustment to medication. His picture of DIY
tools (Fig. 2a) created a record of a day’s activities as a point
of reference, which could later explain an unusual set of glu-
cose results, or act as a guide for similar instances.

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark112The photo and location data captured two distinct types of
setting. Participants like Ruth and Mark only took pictures
when they performed a glucose test, contextualising a read-
ing. However, other participants such as Lauren and Matt
captured activities as they happened, without measuring their
GI. Those who had captured images at a reading were able to
infer why they took the reading and then recall their previous
activity. However, those actively capturing these activities
when they happened had a immediate depiction of the events.
This distinction in timing and utility has not been previously
reported, and may confuse social commenting (c.f. [2]).

Participants suggested that this “photo-memo”ing is a poten-
tial likely scenario over a longer period of time. They specu-
lated that had there been more situations that were out of the
ordinary, imagery data may have assisted in diagnosing the
cause of unexplained glucose events.

The study of ConCap has thus shown that mobiles can cap-
ture images either during an activity or at a later reading, that
users can utilise photographs in four powerful, varied ways to
capture relevant information, and that these images have the
power to provide insights via autonomous reﬂection.

Key Design Considerations
The ubiquity of smartphones render them more discreet than
traditional ‘medical’ devices, which as O’Kane notes, so-
cially expose their users. The unremarkable form of a phone
and its frequent presence make it a potentially powerful tool.
ConCap exploits methods of capture that require limited at-
tention and input from a user at the moment of use. This
enabled its users to achieve their key short-term objective of
collecting contextual information, with limited disruption to
their current primary task (e.g., socialising at a BBQ).

Those with chronic conditions feel that managing their health
already consumes too much time. Good tools should be
quick and discreet:
it is vital to provide lightweight tools
that capture of information quickly. Focussing on short-term,
app-style functions made ConCap easier to adopt. Given
the difﬁculties in changing routine that even our ten positive
users reported, the cost of adopting a new device needs to
be extremely low. Lowering such barriers by simple, almost
simplistic interaction, makes users more likely to engage in
recording of health information.

In longer term use, the current hope of achieving sustained
high levels of self-monitoring [17] seems misplaced. Our
standard, ﬁxed users had rigid regimes that enabled lower
monitoring, and even those experiencing ﬂuctuations re-
ported regular periods of similar behaviour. Change, ex-
pected or unexpected, led to heightened monitoring, and in-
creased reﬂection, to determine underlying causes and pro-
cesses. This cycle of rising and falling use is, for 10 of our 12
participants, central to their experience and need, and every
one described instances where their monitoring had fallen. It
would thus be unwise for apps to demand regular and fre-
quent interaction. Systems which intrude and demand atten-
tion at periods where management is perceived by the patient
as good are likely to be met with hostility. Ideally a system
should sense when to provide support, and when not to. In-

termittent use, driven by external triggers, is also weakly sup-
ported in the context of PIM, which emphasises linear pro-
cesses [14]. This is therefore a key issue for future research.

CONCLUSION
Through our low-impact intervention, it became clear that
there are several contextual factors that affect the manage-
ment of chronic conditions.
For those facing voluntary
change, or strong ﬂuctuations, there was a higher level of re-
ﬂection, and a raised frequency of monitoring. Conversely,
when health was stable and variation low, particularly when
supported by a ﬁxed regime of diet and exercise, monitoring
continued at a regular rate and reﬂection was infrequent.

Adopting an unfamiliar
technology was most difﬁcult
when routines were highly structured, and long-established.
Nonetheless, the inherent cost of adapting to a new technol-
ogy proved valuable to ten of our twelve participants. While
location sensing provided some utility, it proved subjectively
less useful than mobile photography, despite an almost iden-
tical level of use. Even Ruth, one of the four more skeptical
users, found value in individual images. Photographs were
used in four different ways, and capture was seldom literal.
Images that resulted in insights and understanding often had
meanings that were clear to the participant, but opaque to the
outside observer. The connection between established tools –
insulin doses and glucose readings – and the lightweight cap-
ture proved particularly valuable to those with a heightened
concern in their condition, be it recent ﬂuctuations or chosen
life-changes such as raised exercise or pregnancy.

Mobile technology has great potential in managing of chronic
conditions. The immediate availability of everyday devices
such as mobile phones makes them a suitable platform for
logging of personal health information. We have demon-
strated that mobile lightweight tools can assist individual re-
ﬂection, without close monitoring by health experts. With
the rising tide of chronic disease, and increasing costs of spe-
cialist medical advice, unanchored mobile tools could make
a powerful contribution to world health.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Many thanks to the EPSRC for their support through grant
EP/G059063/1, and to our participants.

REFERENCES

1. Ballegaard, S. A., Hansen, T. R., and Kyng, M.

Healthcare in everyday life: designing healthcare
services for daily life. In Proc., CHI ’08, ACM (2008),
1807–1816.

2. Baumer, E. P., Katz, S. J., Freeman, J. E., Adams, P.,

Gonzales, A. L., Pollak, J., Retelny, D., Niederdeppe, J.,
Olson, C. M., and Gay, G. K. Prescriptive persuasion
and open-ended social awareness: Expanding the design
space of mobile health. In Proc., CSCW ’12, ACM
(2012), 475–484.

3. Bodenheimer, T., Lorig, K., Holman, H., and Grumbach,

K. Patient self-management of chronic disease in
primary care. JAMA: the journal of the American
Medical Association 288, 19 (Nov. 2002), 2469–2475.

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark1134. Brown, B. A. T., Sellen, A. J., and O’Hara, K. P. A diary
study of information capture in working life. In Proc.,
CHI ’00, ACM (2000), 438–445.

18. Matthews, M., and Doherty, G. In the mood: engaging
teenagers in psychotherapy using mobile phones. In
Proc., CHI ’11, ACM (2011), 2947–2956.

5. Carter, S., and Mankoff, J. When participants do the

capturing: the role of media in diary studies. In Proc.,
CHI ’05, ACM (2005), 899–908.

6. Choe, E. K., Lee, N. B., Lee, B., Pratt, W., and Kientz,
J. A. Understanding quantiﬁed-selfers’ practices in
collecting and exploring personal data. In Procs.
SIGCHI Conf. on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’14, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2014),
1143–1152.

7. Cordeiro, F., Bales, E., Cherry, E., and Fogarty, J.
Rethinking the mobile food journal: Exploring
opportunities for lightweight photo-based capture. In
Procs. ACM, SIGCHI ’15, ACM (2015), 3207–3216.

8. Funnell, M. M., Anderson, R. M., Arnold, M. S., Barr,
P. A., Donnelly, M., Johnson, P. D., Taylor-Moon, D.,
and White, N. H. Empowerment: an idea whose time
has come in diabetes education. The Diabetes educator
17, 1 (Feb. 1991), 37–41.

9. Guldenpfennig, F., and Fitzpatrick, G. Getting more out
of your images: augmenting photos for recollection and
reminiscence. In Proc., BCS-HCI ’11, British Computer
Society (2011), 467–472.

10. Jacobs, M. L., Clawson, J., and Mynatt, E. D. My
journey compass: A preliminary investigation of a
mobile tool for cancer patients. In Proc., CHI ’14, ACM
(2014), 663–672.

11. Kaufman, D. R., Starren, J., Patel, V. L., Morin, P. C.,

Hilliman, C., Pevzner, J., Weinstock, R. S., Goland, R.,
and Shea, S. A cognitive framework for understanding
barriers to the productive use of a diabetes home
telemedicine system. AMIA Annual Symposium
Proceedings (2003), 356–360.

12. Kelly, L., Byrne, D., and Jones, G. J. F. The role of
places and spaces in lifelog retrieval. In Personal
Information Management (Nov. 2009).

13. Klasnja, P., Civan Hartzler, A., Unruh, K. T., and Pratt,

W. Blowing in the wind: Unanchored patient
information work during cancer care. In Proc., CHI ’10,
ACM (2010), 193–202.

14. Li, I., Dey, A., and Forlizzi, J. A stage-based model of
personal informatics systems. In Procs., SIGCHI ’10,
ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2010), 557–566.

15. Mamykina, L., Miller, A. D., Mynatt, E. D., and
Greenblatt, D. Constructing identities through
storytelling in diabetes management. In Proc., CHI ’10,
ACM (2010), 1203–1212.

16. Mamykina, L., Mynatt, E., Davidson, P., and Greenblatt,

D. MAHI: investigation of social scaffolding for
reﬂective thinking in diabetes management. In Proc.,
CHI ’08, ACM (2008), 477–486.

17. Mamykina, L., Mynatt, E. D., and Kaufman, D. R.

Investigating health management practices of individuals
with diabetes. In Proc., CHI ’06, ACM (2006), 927–936.

19. O’Kane, A. A., Rogers, Y., and Blandford, A. E.

Gaining empathy for non-routine mobile device use
through autoethnography. In Proc., CHI ’14, ACM
(2014), 987–990.

20. Owen, T., Buchanan, G., and Thimbleby, H.

Understanding user requirements in take-home diabetes
management technologies. In Proc., BCS-HCI ’12,
British Computer Society (2012), 268–273.

21. Purpura, S., Schwanda, V., Williams, K., Stubler, W.,
and Sengers, P. Fit4life: The design of a persuasive
technology promoting healthy behavior and ideal
weight. In Proc., CHI ’11, ACM (2011), 423–432.

22. Rekimoto, J., Miyaki, T., and Ishizawa, T. Lifetag:

WiFi-based continuous location logging for life pattern
analysis. In Proc, LoCA’07, Springer (2007), 35–49.

23. The George Institute For Global Health. Realising the
potential of patient empowerment for tackling chronic
disease. URL:
http://www.bupa.com/media/289194/realising_the_
potential_of_patient_empowerment_-_final.pdf,
September 2011.

24. The World Health Organisation. Global status report on

noncommunicable diseases. URL:
http://whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2011/
9789240686458_eng.pdf, 2010.

25. Rogers, Y., Connelly, K., Tedesco, L., Hazlewood, W.,
Kurtz, A., Hall, R. E., Hursey, J., and Toscos, T. Why
it’s worth the hassle: The value of in-situ studies when
designing ubicomp. In Proc., UbiComp ’07,
Springer-Verlag (2007), 336–353.

26. Smith, B. K., Frost, J., Albayrak, M., and Sudhakar, R.
Integrating glucometers and digital photography as
experience capture tools to enhance patient
understanding and communication of diabetes
self-management practices. Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing 11, 4 (Aug. 2006), 273–286.

27. Wagner, E. H., Austin, B. T., Davis, C., Hindmarsh, M.,
Schaefer, J., and Bonomi, A. Improving chronic illness
care: Translating evidence into action. Health Affairs 20,
6 (Nov. 2001), 64–78.

28. Wald, J. S., Middleton, B., Bloom, A., Walmsley, D.,
Gleason, M., Nelson, E., Li, Q., Epstein, M., Volk, L.,
and Bates, D. W. A patient-controlled journal for an
electronic medical record: issues and challenges. Studies
in health technology and informatics 107, Pt 2 (2004),
1166–1170.

29. Wild, S., Roglic, G., Green, A., Sicree, R., and King, H.
Global prevalence of diabetes estimates for the year
2000 and projections for 2030. Diabetes Care 27, 5
(May 2004), 1047–1053.

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark114