Contextual Influences on the Use and Non-Use of Digital 
Technology While Exercising at the Gym 

Misha Patel 
Foolproof and University College London 
London, United Kingdom 
misha.patel@foolproof.co.uk 

Aisling Ann O’Kane 
University College London 
London, United Kingdom 
a.okane@cs.ucl.ac.uk 

ABSTRACT 
The  use  of  wearable  technology  will  become  significantly 
more prevalent in the coming years, with major companies 
releasing  devices  such  as  the  Samsung  Gear  Fit.  With 
sensors,  such  as  pedometers  and  heart  rate  monitors, 
embedded  in  these  devices  it  is  possible  to  use  them  for 
fitness  purposes.  However,  little  is  known  about  how 
wearable  adopters  actually  use  wearable  and  existing 
technologies  during  exercise.  In  an  exploratory  situated 
study  of  technology  use  and  non-use  in  the  context  of  the 
gym,  fitness  informatics  adopters  showed  varied  practices 
related  to  distraction,  appropriating  technology  into  their 
routines, and information needs. We discuss this variance in 
relation  to  individual  differences  and  the  impact  of  the 
physical nature of the gym. Although further research might 
show  other  influencing  factors  such  as  the  social  context, 
we  make  a  case  for  the  use  of  situated  studies  to  uncover 
tensions  that  lead  to  use  and  non-use  of  technology  that 
arise in the different unfolding situations of using wearables 
in  everyday  life,  including  at  the  gym,  which  is  a 
surprisingly complex context. 

INTRODUCTION 
There has been an increase in the popularity and availability 
of  personal  informatics  tools.  This  includes  the  growth  of 
fitness mobile applications being developed for smartphone 
use, but also standalone wearable devices. The popularity of 
these  technologies  will  continue  to  grow  with  large 
companies releasing smartwatches with embedded activity-
tracking  functionality,  such  as  the  Samsung  Gear  Fit.  This 
trend has led the domains of exercise, fitness and wellbeing 
to  be  of  increasing  interest  to  the  HCI  community  (e.g. 
[29]).  

There  has  been  significant  emphasis  on  designing 
technology  to  encourage  people  to  engage  in  physical 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and 
that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. 
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM 
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions 
from Permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2015, April 18 - 23, 2015, Seoul, Republic of Korea 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3145-6/15/04…$15.00 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702384 

activity.  This  includes  the  design  of  ubiquitous  computing 
tools  [4],  the  development  of  fitness  device  infrastructures 
[23],  virtual  trainers  [12]  and  interactive  social  computer 
games  [27].  These  HCI  studies  have  been  concerned  with 
the  user  evaluation  of  bespoke  persuasive 
fitness 
technologies.  However,  people  who  adopt  personal 
informatics typically do not use just one type of technology; 
for instance, Rooksby and colleagues discovered that some 
people  interweave  their  use  of  different  activity  trackers 
[36].  There  is  a  dearth  of  exploratory  research  that  has 
investigated  how  and  why  different  people  use  and  do  not 
use various technologies during physical activity, including 
at the gym: a popular place for regular exercise. 

Regular  physical  activity  is  essential  for  good  health  and 
wellbeing,  bringing  about  a  range  of  physical,  social  and 
mental  health  benefits  that  are  important  for  both  the 
individual  and  for  society  [4].  As  people  become  more 
aware of these rewards, the prevalence of people who go to 
the  gym  (also  known  as  fitness  centres  or  health  clubs)  is 
rising, with over a hundred new facilities opening in the UK 
in 2013 alone, and with memberships rising to 12.6% of the 
UK population [20]. Although users’ behaviours and needs 
regarding mobile fitness technology have been investigated, 
there  is  little  research  on  technology  use  at  the  gym  and 
many  studies  use  self-reported  and  retrospective  data 
independent  of  the  context  of  use  (e.g.  [19,  36].  As 
behavioural 
the 
interactions  occur  and  independent  of  their  context,  it  is 
argued  that  such  methods  do  not  elicit  comprehensive 
information  about  behaviour  as  it  really  happens  in  the 
world [11].  

typically  obtained  after 

insights  are 

situated 

Examining  interactions  with  technology  within  the  context 
of  use  is  crucial,  as  user  actions  are  fundamentally 
embedded  within  a  particular  situation  [39]  and  context  is 
an  ever-changing  unfolding  notion  [18].  There  have  been 
exploratory 
general 
studies 
technology use within contexts including the workplace [7] 
and the home [9]; however there has been little exploratory 
investigation into the use of technology in gyms. An ‘in the 
wild’ approach [35] is particularly appropriate for research 
into  the  use  of  fitness  mobile  applications  and  wearable 
devices,  as  they  are  designed  to  be  used  in  an  diversity  of 
uncontrollable settings [28]. As fitness informatics adopters 
are  inherently  interested  in  the  use  of  new  technology,  we 

investigating 

Wellness & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2923 
 
explored  how  the  gym  context  influenced  their  adoption, 
use  and  non-use  of  digital  technologies  for  purposes 
ranging  from  tracking  to  entertainment  during  individual 
physical activity.  

BACKGROUND AND RELATED RESEARCH 

is  well  studied 

Physical Activity and Fitness Research 
Exercise 
the  domains  of  sports 
in 
psychology  and  behaviour  change.  The  concepts  behind 
some  persuasive  technologies  to  support  physical  activity 
are  loosely  based  on  health  behaviour  change  theories, 
featuring  elements  of  social  support,  motivation  and  self-
efficacy.  

Motivation is a key feature of exercise  and can account for 
individual  differences  in  behaviours,  inspiring  people  to 
engage  in  exercise.  Intrinsic  motivation  is  described  as 
performing a behaviour for its own sake [40]; exercising for 
the  enjoyment  of  the  experience.  It  has  been  shown  that 
performance  feedback  and  having  a  personal  choice  of  the 
type  of  music  to  listen  to  influences  situational  motivation 
[40].  On  the  other  hand,  extrinsic  motivation  is  doing 
something  as  a  means  to  an  end as  opposed  to  for  its  own 
sake,  for  instance  exercising  for  the  purpose  of  a  reward 
such as achieving a weight loss target [40].  

It  has  been  found  that  tracking  one’s  activity  is  beneficial 
for fitness behaviour change [38]. Setting goals for oneself 
is  also  a  well-known  strategy  that  has  been  shown  to 
contribute  towards  behaviour  change  for  fitness  activity 
[13].  The  design  of  many  mobile  fitness  applications 
revolves  around  activity  tracking  and  goal  setting  with  the 
aim of increasing user’s physical activity [14].  

that  during 

As  well  as  the  influence  of  individual  personal  goals  on 
motivation, research has also demonstrated the motivational 
effects  of  external  stimulation  during  physical  activity. 
Engaging in technology for entertainment such as watching 
TV  and  listening  to  music  has  been  discovered  to  have 
positive psychological and physiological effects on exercise 
performance  [5].  In  a  review,  Karagoris  and  Priest  [26] 
summarised 
repetitive,  endurance-related 
anaerobic  activities,  listening  to  self-selected  motivational 
music demonstrated performance enhancing effects (e.g. an 
increase 
reduce 
perceptions of exertion; it is hypothesized that this may be 
due to a ‘dissociation’ effect through which music distracts 
attention  away  from  the  pain  associated  with  the  exercise 
[34].  Another  way  in  which  music  has  been  shown  to 
increase  performance  is  through  the  characteristics  of 
synchronous  music,  whereby 
rhythm  moderates 
movement patterns [6].  

in  stamina).  Music  was 

found 

the 

to 

Another  theoretical  concept  that  relates  to  the  individual’s 
experience  during  exercise  is  ‘flow’  [33].  ‘Flow’  is  a 
positive state of mind characterised by complete immersion 
and absorption in an activity [17]. Research has mentioned 
the positive effects of ‘flow’ on physical activity adherence 
[33].  

Interactive Technology to Aid Physical Activity 
The availability of health and fitness tracking capabilities is 
growing  with  the  release  of  new  commercially  available 
technologies  [21].  In  light  of  this,  fitness  tracking  sensors, 
such as heart rate monitors, accelerometers, pedometers and 
GPS (to track outdoor running and cycling) are being added 
to  mobile  and  wearable  devices  such  as  smartphones  and 
smartwatches.  For  instance,  the  Samsung  Gear  Fit  tracks 
everyday  activity  such  as  the  number  of  steps,  presenting 
values  to  the  user  such  as  calories  burnt  and  distance 
achieved,  and  it  interfaces  with  Samsung  phones  for  GPS 
and to provide notifications (e.g. text messages) through the 
watch.  

There  has  been  some  research  investigating  behaviour 
relating  to  the  use  of  personal  informatics  technology  for 
general  health  and  wellbeing.  Ahtinen  and  colleagues  [2] 
conducted  a  cross-cultural 
involving  a 
technology  probe  where  participants  recorded  subjective 
experiences  about  their  use  of  a  wellness  mobile  app  for 
two  weeks.  Findings 
and 
environmental  factors  influenced  user  needs  and  usage  of 
the application.  

field  study 

showed 

cultural 

that 

Similarly,  Rooksby  et  al.  [36]  explored  the  area  of  ‘lived 
informatics’  in  terms  of  the  ways  in  which  people  use 
health  and  wellbeing  activity  tracking  devices  they  have 
already  adopted.  The  self-reported  study  revealed  several 
categories  of  tracking  behaviour,  including  documentary 
tracking (where participants track their activity for reasons 
such as facilitating understanding of their activity or sharing 
their  stories  with  others)  and  directive  tracking  (where 
participants track their activity in order to reach a goal). 

interviews  and 

Approaches to Studying Fitness Technology 
The  majority  of  HCI  research  that  investigates  fitness 
technology  use  is  for  the  purpose  of  evaluating  specific 
fitness technologies.  The Sports Tracker,  a mobile outdoor 
sports  tracking  application  [1],  was  evaluated  through 
examining  usage  habits  and  user  experience  data  for 
existing  users  of  the  application,  which  were  collected 
text-message 
through  one-off  phone 
questionnaires  lasting  two  weeks.  Consolvo  et  al.  [14] 
conducted  a  field  evaluation  of  Houston,  a  mobile 
application  that  enables  step-count  tracking  to  enhance 
users’  physical  activity 
in-situ 
evaluation  study  was  implemented  where  participants  used 
the  application,  were  interviewed  about  their  experiences, 
and  completed  questionnaires  and  daily  records  of  step 
counts. Another system that was evaluated ‘in the wild’ was 
the UbiFit Garden system [15]; a mobile application along 
with  a  fitness  device  which  displays  a  visualisation  of  the 
user’s  physical  activity.  The  evaluation  of  the  system  was 
run on mobile phones that participants used and they were 
interviewed  to  examine  user  experiences.  These  studies 
have 
the  use  of  specific 
technology, rather than looking at the range of technologies 
that can be and are used for personal fitness.  

investigating 

focused  on 

three-week 

levels.  A 

Wellness & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2924Other 
than  Rooksby  and  colleagues  [36]  who  used 
interviews and on-going self-reports on the use of personal 
informatics  discussed  above,  there  are  only  a  limited 
number of studies within the HCI literature that take a more 
open,  exploratory  approach  in  examining  general  user 
behaviour  in  the  domain  of  health.  Fritz  et  al.  [19] 
investigated  the  behaviour  of  long-term  users  of  activity 
monitoring  devices  to  find  out  how  they  use  their devices; 
however  they  only  used  retrospective  interview  data  to  do 
so. On the other hand, Goodman [22] used more extensive 
methods  (blog  readings,  interviews,  diary  reports  for 
activity  logging,  and  pedometer  data)  to  explore  people’s 
health issues and behaviours in their daily lives, but only as 
a  work  in  progress  in  order  to  discover  ways  in  which 
health  technology  could  be  designed  to  support  behaviour 
change.  However,  there  have  been  few  exploratory  studies 
into technology use in the context of the gym.  

Other  than  a  few  studies  of  specific  technologies,  many 
investigations  looking  at  technology  use  in  this  review  did 
not  carry  out  situated  research.  The  methods  that  were 
primarily  used  consisted  of  post-hoc  interviews,  diaries, 
experience  sampling  methods  and  logging  devices  [1,36]. 
The  use  of  these  methods  undermines  the  pertinent  role  of 
the environment and situation of the activity in influencing 
interactions  with  technology  [35].  As  Brown  et  al.  [11] 
argue,  subtle  but  meaningful  interactions  with  technology 
may  be  lost  if  the  data  is  based  on  retrospective  and  self-
reported  information  rather  than  the  actual  behaviour  as  it 
happens  in  the  real  world,  during  real  time.  Additionally, 
retrospective reports lack detail and may not capture every 
occurrence  of  use  as  they  are  susceptible  to  report  bias, 
the  participant 
is  dependent  on  what 
where  recall 
remembers and considers relevant [3]. Logging devices can 
obtain  data  at  the  point  of  use,  but  they  only  provide  a 
conceptual  outline  of  device  usage  and  produces 
descriptions  of  only  general  use  rather  than  understanding 
particular  accounts  of  use  [11].  Based  on  Brown  and 
colleagues’  rich  findings  on  mobile  phone  use  using 
situated methods, the current exploratory research warrants 
a  situated  approach  to  investigate  technology  use  in  the 
context where fitness informatics may be used: the gym.  

METHODOLOGY 

Context of the Study 
The  study  took  place  in  a  busy  London  university  gym, 
which  is  also  open  to  the  general  public.  Permission  was 
gained from the gym to recruit members for the study. It is 
a  relatively  basic  gym  with  regards  to  the  facilities  and 
to  other  more 
technology  available, 
expensive  gyms  nearby.  Other  than  a  separate  floor  for 
group classes, it comprises four main areas with: machines 
for  aerobic  exercises  (e.g.  treadmills,  cross  trainers  and 
exercise bikes), resistance machines, free weights and a mat 
area  for  stretching  or  floor  exercises  (see  Figure  2,  left). 
Aerobic  exercises  are  activities  that  involve  constant 
repetitive movements of the arms and legs, heightening  

in  comparison 

Figure 1: Samsung Gear Fit worn on the wrist at the gym 

(e.g.  weightlifting)  where 

heart rate  and respiration (e.g. running), and it can involve 
interval  training  consisting  of  systematic  fluctuation  of 
speed. Anaerobic exercises comprise short bursts of intense 
recovery  breaks 
exertion 
(‘deadtime’)  are  usually  taken  in  between  exercises  or 
‘reps’. On the wall in front of the aerobic machines are a set 
of  mirrors  and  five  television  screens  displaying  various 
subtitled programs while loud, popular music plays through 
speakers around the whole gym area. 

autoethnography  was 

Autoethnography 
The  initial  phase  in  this  research  was  a  four-week 
autoethnography study by the first author with the Samsung 
Gear Fit (see Figure 1), as described above. The purpose of 
this 
in-depth 
understanding of the various contexts of everyday use [30] 
of  a  fitness  related  wearable  device.  Her  experiences 
relating to its use were documented in textual diary entries 
at  the  end  of  every  day.  The  insights  influenced  the 
structure and format of the user study, and the diary entries 
were analysed as part of the findings.  

to  obtain 

an 

In-Situ User Study 

Participants  
Recruitment posters were put up in the gym and around the 
university  campus.  Participants  were  only  recruited  if  they 
were  members  of  the  gym  and  currently  used  or  had  used 
wearable  technology  or  fitness  applications.  This  ensured 
that  participants  had  at  least  some  prior  experience  with 
using  tracking  technology  and  the  facilities  in  the  gym  to 
prevent the additional extrinsic motivation of making them 
exercise  or  adding  technology  only  for  the  purpose  of  the 
study [32]. Participants gave informed consent as stipulated 
by  UCL  ethical  procedures  and  were 
financially 
compensated with £10 cash on completion of the session.  

The study involved 11 participants: four females and seven 
males between the ages of 21 and 35 years (mean age of 26 
years).  Nine  participants  were  students  and  two  were 
professionals,  all  living  in  London.  Eight  participants 
currently  owned  or  had  used  a  wearable  device  including: 
Fitbit3,  Nike  Fuelband4,  Sony  Smartband5,  heart  rate 
monitor and pedometer. Five participants occasionally used 
a smartphone application for tracking running or diet. Eight 
participants  brought  in  their  smartphones  to  the  gym  to 
listen to music, watch TV, use messaging and social media, 

Wellness & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2925 
Figure 2: The layout of the gym (left), and the location of the contextual interviews and in-situ coding meetings (right) 

or as a tool to record their exercise. Pseudonyms are used in 
the findings to preserve anonymity. 

User Study Procedure  
To test and refine the chosen methodology, two participants 
who  fulfilled  the  recruitment  criteria  took  part  in  pilot 
studies.  Data  from  pilot  study  was  not  directly  included  in 
the  results  of  the  main  user  study  as  the  participant 
observation  changed  significantly  after  their  participation, 
but the findings did contribute to the overall analysis.  

The main user study involved three different data collection 
phases for each of the 11 participants, conducted by the first 
author:  entry  briefing  and  contextual  interview,  participant 
observations  and  dialogue  during  exercise,  and  exit 
contextual interview and debrief.  

The  semi-structured  contextual  entry  interviews  lasted 
between 30 and 45 minutes and were conducted in the gym 
reception  area  next  to  a  big  window  with  a  view  of  the 
context of use (see Figure 2, right), which can give a richer 
account than other types of interviews [25]. Interviews were 
semi-structured  with  the  aim  of  developing  rapport  with 
participants  and  for  them  to  feel  comfortable  to  talk  about 
their experiences. The purpose of the interview was to gain 
understanding  of  how  they  currently  perceive  their  use  of 
technology  during  exercise.  An  initial  interview  script  for 
the  first  interview  was  generated  as  a  product  of  the 
autoethnography  and  pilot  interviews,  and  was  used  to 
guide  the  interview.  Questions  involved  asking  about  their 
exercise  routines  (e.g.  What  are  your  motivations  for 
exercise;  why  do  you  attend  the  gym?),  participants’ 
experience  of  various  technologies  during  exercise  (e.g. 
What type of wearable technology or fitness applications do 
you  use  or  have  you  used  in  the  past?)  and  how  they  use 
technology  when  exercising  (e.g.  Do  you  think  the  use  of 
this  technology  impacts  on  your  exercise  behaviour?). 
Using  an  exploratory  approach,  the  interview  questions 
were  adapted  as  relevant  themes  emerged  from  the  data. 
The interviewer would sometimes prompt the participant to 
keep focus on relevant conversation. Interviews were audio 
recorded to facilitate transcription.  

in 

the  gym 

to  capture 

Immediately after the interview, the first author carried out 
participant  observation  whilst  they  performed  their  usual 
exercise  regime 
technology 
interaction.  Participants  were  asked  to  engage  in  dialogue 
where they verbalised their thoughts and feelings to capture 
their experience and motivations underlying certain actions. 
Observations  lasted  for  the  duration  of  the  participant’s 
exercise  routine,  but  no  longer  than  one  hour.  The  first 
author  was  dressed  in  workout  clothing  and  was  situated 
near  the  participant  on  an  exercise  machine  in  order  to 
blend in. Observation notes were written on a smartphone, 
as the gym did not allow video capture. 

Post-interviews  were  conducted  immediately  after  the 
participant  observations  and  lasted  for  about  ten  minutes, 
taking  place  in  context  (Figure  2,  right).  The  researcher 
clarified  any  questions  about  the  participant’s  observed 
behaviour,  and  then  summarised  the  information  gathered 
from the interview and observation. 

Data Analysis 
Iterative  data  gathering  and  analysis  proceeded  with  the 
interviews  being  immediately  transcribed  and  the  textual 
observations  written  out  in  full,  and  then  both  coded  for 
salient  themes  by  the  first  author.  Throughout  the  analysis 
process,  emerging  themes  and  insights  were  discussed 
between  the  authors  in  the  context  of  the  gym  [31]  during 
in-situ coding meetings (see Figure 2, right), which helped 
to  adapt  the  focus  of  questions  asked  in  subsequent 
interviews [16]. The data analysis process took part in four 
stages,  loosely  following  the  phases  of  thematic  analysis 
[10]:  immediately  transcribing  the  data,  becoming  familiar 
with  it;  open  coding  of  the  data  between  each  interview 
looking 
interviews, 
themes 
observations,  and  autoethnography;  and  axial  coding  to 
categorise  them  systematically  using  an  affinity  diagram 
[24]. Finally, three rounds of categorisation were performed 
to drill down from issues with adoption, carrying and using 
technology, focusing on fitness and non-fitness technology, 
uncovering  tensions  leading  to  use  and  non-use  that  are 
presented in the findings. Data were  also analysed through 
the links to previous literature [10].  

salient 

from 

the 

for 

Wellness & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2926      
 
 
FINDINGS 
The  findings  are  arranged  in  three  separate  themes  that 
arose  from  the  data,  but  there  is  much  overlap  between 
topics.  The  themes  are  presented  as  the  following  use  and 
non-use  tensions:  technology  used  for  distraction  vs. 
technology  causing  disruption;  information  needs  met  by 
information  provided  by 
technology  vs. 
technology;  and  exercise  influencing  technology  use  vs. 
technology use influencing exercise. 

avoiding 

Distraction vs. Disruption 
There were many cases where participants used technology 
to distract themselves from the task at hand: exercising. On 
the other hand, there were situations where technology used 
for  non-fitness  reasons  caused  disruption  to  exercise,  so 
participants actively avoided it. 

Technology Used for Distraction 
Six participants were observed using technology as a source 
of  distraction:  they  got  immersed  in  watching  videos, 
listening to music or audio books, or looking at the machine 
display.  This  diverted  their  attention  away  from  thinking 
about  the  exercise  towards  the  distraction  technology. 
Participants  suggested  that  they  required  distraction  from 
concentrating on performing certain exercises in the gym as 
this  reduced  the  intensity  of  their  perception  of  the  pain, 
effort and tiredness experienced during exercise (cf. [34]). 

(Referring to the machine display and music) “Having 
something else to concentrate on takes my mind away from 
pain and tiredness” (Andy, interview) 

“I try not to think about what I am doing so I watch TV on 
my phone. Distraction is my key. When I cannot use my 
phone I have to concentrate on it and I feel every second of 
it” (Juliette, observation and dialogue) 

The  need  to  divert  attention  meant  that  some  participants 
used  any  technology  they  could  to  distract  them.  One 
participant watched TV to distract her from her cross trainer 
exercise,  regardless  of  the  value  of  entertainment  it 
provided. 

“I would watch TV just to take my mind off what I’m doing, 
even though I don’t really like what’s on” (Helen, 
observation and dialogue) 

This  need  to  use  technology  for  distraction  was  mainly 
observed  for  participants  performing  aerobic  exercises that 
did  not  necessarily  require  attention  on  the  activity  or  the 
machine  display  in  order  to  achieve  performance,  such  as 
running  at  a  steady  pace  on  the  treadmill.  This  type  of 
exercise  allowed  participants  to  disengage  their  attention 
from  the  exercise  and  to  direct  it  towards  something  else. 
However,  when  participants  performed  interval  training  or 
weight  training,  many  did  not  use  technology  for  the 
purpose of distraction. 

“I only watch TV on my phone when I’m doing aerobic 
exercises like on the elliptical machine, but I don’t on the 
resistance machines” (Juliette, observation and dialogue) 

Technology Use Causing Disruption 
One  of  the  reasons  that  participants  didn’t  make  as  much 
use of technology during anaerobic exercises as they did for 
aerobic  exercises  was  because  many  preferred  to  mentally 
count  the  number  of  repetitions  they  were  performing  to 
keep  track  of  their  exercise  progress  and  therefore  needed 
to direct their attention towards the task. 

“I would stop listening to music and focus on counting the 
reps in my head instead, so I know how many I can manage 
to do today” (Sammy, observation and dialogue) 

required 

to  manually  count 

Unlike  aerobic  machines,  the  resistance  machines  did  not 
provide  automatic  activity  tracking  functionality  and  so 
participants  were 
their 
repetitions.  This  need  for  concentration  on  counting 
repetitions  inhibited  the  use  of  any  technology  that  might 
disrupt this, even when participants would have preferred to 
use  it  for  distraction  purposes.  Three  participants  would 
have  still  preferred  to  use  their  phones  to  watch  TV  and 
listen  to  music  during  weight  training,  but  they  did  not, 
because  it  conflicted  with  their  need  to  count  their 
repetitions. 

“It would be great if the machine or my [wrist] Fitbit could 
automatically count my reps so I could listen to my music 
properly” (Sammy, observation and dialogue)  

Even  for  aerobic  exercise,  disruption  could  be  unwelcome 
and technology could be avoided to minimise it. When the 
smartphone notification feature was active on the Samsung 
Gear  Fit  during  the  first  author’s  activity  on  the  cross 
trainer,  it  disrupted  her  concentration.  She  found  this 
constant  disruption  frustrating  and  eventually  disabled  that 
feature for the rest of the duration of her exercise sessions.  

“The notifications made me lose concentration of what I 
was doing and I had to slow down just to read the message 
which was annoying, so I turned it off” (autoethnography 
diary)  

Another reason why people avoided disruption stems from 
their  beliefs  about  the  relationship  between  exercise  and 
technology use. Some participants believed that exercise is 
an  opportunity  to  focus  on  the  mind  and  body:  to  be 
immersed 
the  experience  of  exercise.  The  deep 
concentration  may  be  related  to  a  sense  of  ‘flow’;  a  state 
characterised  by  complete  immersion  and  absorption  in  an 
activity [17].  

in 

“I think exercise should be a time to get away from 
unnecessary technology and distractions and just focus on 
exercising and being in the zone, that’s why I don’t even 
bring my phone with me” (Kevin, interview) 

Wellness & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2927findings  show 

that  unintentional  disruption 

Summary of the Distraction/Disruption Tension 
to 
The 
concentration  can  consequently 
impact  performance, 
enjoyment,  or  even  the  ability  to  exercise,  which  can  be 
viewed  negatively  and  lead  to  disengagement.  For  the 
design  of  technology  that  might  be  used  in  the  gym,  this 
must  be  balanced  with  people’s  desire  to  dissociate  from 
the  exercise  through  distraction,  as  entertainment  can 
motivate people to exercise more often and for longer. 

Information Needs vs. Avoiding Information 
Many  participants  wanted  to  use  technology  to  monitor 
their  practices  and  to  motivate  themselves  by  reviewing 
their  fitness  information.  Unfortunately,  these  information 
needs  sometimes  conflicted  with  their  need  to  avoid 
demotivating information, both in the gym and outside it. 

Information Needs Met by Technology  
Nine  participants  primarily  used  the  measures  of  time, 
distance,  calories  and  heart  rate  on  the  fitness  tracking 
displays  on  aerobic  machines.  Using  these  measurements, 
participants  monitored 
set 
their 
themselves  goals  and  moderated  their  level  of  exertion  to 
reach  their  goal.  This  goal  directed  tracking  behaviour 
relates  to  the  ‘directive  tracking’  style  [36].  For  example, 
two  participants  were  concerned  with  maintaining  their 
heart  rate  within  a  certain  range  and  therefore  during 
aerobic exercises they constantly focused their attention on 
the  heart  rate  display,  moderating  their  exertion  level  to 
achieve their target heart rate. 

current  progress, 

“I look at the heart rate monitor, if it is lower than my 
target then I speed up to try and reach it” (Kevin, 
observation and dialogue) 

It  was  observed  that  participants  used  different  aspects  of 
performance feedback values to motivate their activity, and 
this  was  dependent  on  the  exercise  as  well  as  what  part  of 
the  exercise  they  were  at.  For  instance,  four  participants 
found  seeing  that  there  was  little  time  remaining  of  their 
workout motivated them to increase exertion. 

 “When I see there is only 40 secs left I think to myself, 
“come on you can do it!”” (Marie, observation and 
dialogue) 

As well as for motivational purposes, activity monitoring is 
sometimes  required  for  particular  exercises.  The  three 
participants who performed interval training exercises used 
the  information  on  the  machine  display  as  a  way  to 
structure  their  workout.  They  explained  that  they  used  the 
time display as an indicator for when they needed to adjust 
their speed control. 

“I’m looking at the time so I know that every two minutes I 
need to change my speed” (Marie, observation and 
dialogue) 

In contrast, some participants chose to focus on less reliable 
information; two participants focused on the calorie counter 

on  the  machine  display  as  an  aid  for  exercise  motivation. 
Although they knew this was an inaccurate measure, it was 
satisfying  for  them  just  to  know  that  calories  were  being 
burned  as  their  exercise  goals  were  related  to  weight  loss 
and  body  shape.  This  was  also  observed  for  the  Nike 
Fuelband  where  there  was  satisfaction  gained  by  reaching 
the  ‘next  full  number’  on  a  constantly  ascending  or 
descending  value,  such  as  aiming 
to  achieve  3000 
Fuelpoints rather than stopping at 2800. 

“I would never stop before I reach a full number, even 
though I don’t really know what the Fuelpoints are based 
on” (Harry, observation and dialogue) 

Participants  reviewed  performance  data  logged  by  the 
activity tracking technology after they had exercised at the 
gym. Eight participants described that they enjoyed looking 
at their performance data from wearable devices to facilitate 
a  better  understanding  of 
fitness  behaviour 
(‘documentary tracking’ [36]).  

their 

“Data is knowledge when you look at it in the right way” 
(Nigel, interview) 

One  reason  why  participants  used  fitness  technology 
outside  of  the  gym  was  to  motivate  exercise  behaviour  in 
the  gym.  Martin  claimed  the  Fuelband  data  motivated  him 
to  exercise  in  order  to  not  break  the  streak  of  goal 
achievement  he  had  developed;  the  motivation  stemmed 
from  the  disappointment  of  the  thought  of  not  meeting  the 
goal.  This  shows  the  powerful  motivational  effect  that 
tracking  fitness  and  goals  setting  can  have  on 
the 
participant’s behaviour. 

“I was addicted to meeting my daily goals; once you 
develop streaks, you don’t want to break it.” (Martin, 
interview)  

the 

to  evade 

Avoiding Information Provided by Technology 
Conversely,  some  participants  suggested  that  they  avoided 
information 
feelings  of  shame  and 
disappointment  of  not  being  able  to  meet  a  goal.  Harry 
explained  that  he  avoided  wearing  his  Nike  Fuelband 
device on certain days where he knew that he would not go 
to  the  gym  in  order  to  avoid  the  negative  affect  associated 
with  seeing  an  unmet  goal.  This  may  relate  to  the 
participant  self-identity  as  “somebody  who  always  reaches 
his goal” and so he avoids behaviour that would violate that 
perception. 

“When I am too busy to exercise as much, I don’t wear the 
Fuelband. I don’t like to see that I have not reached my 
goal so would rather not wear it at all on some days” 
(Harry, interview) 

Avoiding  looking  at  certain  measures  of  fitness  tracking 
was  observed  and  some  participants  explained  that  they 
found  it  demotivating  during  their  exercise.  For  constant 
aerobic fast paced, high intensity exercises (e.g. running on 

Wellness & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2928the treadmill), six participants consciously avoided looking 
at the time on the machine display. 

use  of  digital  technology,  but  the  technology  could  also 
influence people’s exercise at the gym.  

Juliette placed her phone on the display pad, deliberately 
covering the time during use of the elliptical machine 
(Juliette, observation notes) 

“I avoid looking at the time when I’m running, it makes my 
goal seem further away” (Nigel, observation and dialogue) 

A  reason  for  this  was  because  participants  believed  that 
watching the clock increases their perception of their effort 
and tiredness, and reduces the perceived speed of time. This 
distortion of perception of time could have a negative effect 
on  some  participants’  motivation  and  consequently  affect 
their performance. 

“When I am tired I avoid constantly looking at the time, it 
makes it feel like more effort and time seems to go slower!” 
(Marie, observation and dialogue) 

As well as the time measure, participants avoided looking at 
other  values  that  also  indicated  low  performance  progress. 
Two  participants  did  not  look  at  the  progress  display  near 
the  beginning  of  their  workout  when  progress  was  low 
because  they  found  it  de-motivating.  This  highlights  that 
the  use  of  technology  is  influenced  by  certain  temporal 
stages within a workout. 

“I don’t want to look at calories at the beginning because it 
is low and I think I am not doing well” (Sammy, 
observation and dialogue) 

Similarly,  it  was  observed  that  some  participants  avoided 
viewing  their  performance  data  until  after  their  workout 
session as opposed to during. One reason for this is because 
seeing  a  larger  achievement  at  the  end  provided  a  greater 
sense  of  accomplishment  and  surprise  rather  than  viewing 
smaller increments of progress. 

“I prefer to see my data after exercise because I feel good 
when I have seen that I have burnt 500 calories in one go, it 
is a nice surprise when I see I have done well” (Juliette, 
interview) 

Summary of the Information Needs Tension 
Our  findings  suggest  that  that  there  is  a  fine  line  to  be 
walked  with  regards  to  fitness  information  presented  to 
people  at  the  gym.  Information  at  the  time  of  exercise 
helped  participants  to  monitor  and  adjust  performance,  but 
it  could  also  be  demotivating  if  it  showed  low  progress. 
Even  arbitrary  data  points  can  motivate  people  if  they  are 
shown positive results, but people can also avoid the use of 
fitness  technology  altogether  if  they  expect  there  to  be 
negative results.  

Exercise Shaping Tech Use vs. Tech Use Shaping 
Exercise  
Another tension that arose from the data was caused by the 
physical nature of the context: the exercises influenced the 

Exercise Influencing Technology Use 
One  factor  that  influenced  the  use  of  technology  was  the 
restrictions  imposed  by  physical  characteristics  of  the 
exercise.  Exercise  involves  dynamic  body  movements, 
which then limit the types of digital technology that can be 
used.  An  example  of  this  was  the  impracticality  of  using 
technology that required sustained visual attention, such as 
reading  when  running.  Harry  stated  that  he  would  have 
liked to use his mobile phone but the physicality of running 
does  not  make  this  possible,  forcing  him  to  not  use  the 
technology as desired. 

“I would like to read from my phone when I’m running, but 
it’s difficult when I’m moving around so I have to wait until 
the breaks” (Harry, observation and dialogue) 

Additionally,  the  specific  aspects  of  exercising  in  the  gym 
limited the functionality that was useful on wearables. The 
Samsung Gear Fit was unable to track the first author’s use 
of the bicycle machine in the gym because the smartphone 
was required for the GPS distance tracking function, which 
went  against  her  expectations  of  just  using  a  wearable 
device during exercise without the need of a phone.  

“I was excited to be able to use the ‘cycle’ tracking function 
at spin class. However I discovered that this feature only 
works when the phone is nearby for GPS detection. I felt 
disappointed” (autoethnography diary) 

The  physical  set  up  of  the  equipment  also  restricted  the 
participants  being  able  to  use  technology  in  their  desired 
way.  For  example,  Juliette  usually  prefers  to  watch  TV  on 
her  phone  and  the  elliptical  trainer  allows  her  to  do  this 
because  the  machine  also  provided  a  shelf  to  place  her 
phone. In contrast, the resistance machines did not afford a 
physical  space  to  place  a  phone  and  so  she  was  unable  to 
watch  TV  during  that  exercise.  She  described  that  this 
limitation  consequently  affected  her  experience  of  the 
exercise  as  she  was  forced  to  focus  on  her  performance, 
thus  increasing  her  awareness  on  the  feelings  of  pain. 
Having  this  repeated  experience  contributed  to  her  losing 
motivation  for 
this  exercise  and  she  stopped  using 
resistance machines altogether. 

Technology Use Influencing Exercise 
The  desire  to  use  some  technology  during  exercise  proved 
to be strong enough to actually impact the way participants 
exercised in the gym. Juliette adapted the way she used the 
elliptical  trainer  in  a  way  to  minimize  interaction  with  the 
display:  she  exercised  at  a  constant  speed  and  set  the  time 
to the maximum workout length to watch a TV program on 
her tablet.  

“I guess I want to keep at a steady pace so I can 
concentrate on watching TV and not have to think about 
changing my speed or playing with the display [...] I don’t 

Wellness & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2929really want to be distracted from my distraction!” (Juliette, 
observation and dialogue). 

technology 

for  performance 

There  were  some  situations  where  participants  wanted  to 
use 
the 
functionality  of  technology  led  to  a  change  in  the physical 
activity. Juliette wanted to monitor her performance on the 
elliptical  trainer  but  her  Fitbit  did  not  capture  her  strides 
when she held onto the handlebars, so she chose not to hold 
on to the handlebars as a way of gaining stride information. 

tracking  but 

“It’s annoying that the Fitbit doesn’t count my gym activity 
[...] I don’t hold onto the handlebars so my strides can 
count towards my daily step count. It looks stupid and 
makes the exercise harder” (Juliette, observation and 
dialogue) 

It was uncovered that this same participant had a strategy of 
avoiding  the  use  of  non-fitness  related  technology  outside 
of  the  gym  in  order  to  motivate  her  to  exercise:  Juliette 
refrains  from  watching  TV  and  films  on  Netflix  at  home 
and  sets  herself  a  rule  that  she  can  only  watch  TV  at  the 
gym.  This  motivates  her  to  go  to  the  gym  to  exercise  as  it 
allows the opportunity to watch her favourite programs. 

“I feel less guilty when I’m bingeing on Netflix at the gym. I 
promised myself I would only watch them here [in the gym] 
and not at home” (Juliette, observation and dialogue) 

Summary of the Exercise/Technology Tension 
The  findings  indicate  that  the  physicality  of  the  gym 
impacted  the  ways  people  were  able  to  use  technology, 
leading to issues of frustration. The need to use technology 
impacted  exercise  negatively  in  some  cases,  but  its  active 
avoidance  could  also  motivate  exercise.  Technology 
impacting  exercise  and  exercise  impacting  technology  use 
led  to  disengagement  and  engagement  with  both  the 
technologies and the exercises. 

in 

includes  variety 

DISCUSSION 
‘Going  to  the  gym’  can  be  perceived  as  a  singular  activity 
in  a  box;  people  going  in,  exercising  and  coming  out. 
However,  the  findings  of  this  situated  exploratory  study 
show  that  this  is  not  the  case;  the  gym  is  a  complex  and 
dynamic  environment.  This 
the 
physicality  of  exercises,  the  physical  design,  and  the 
facilities as well as how an exercise changes over its course. 
The  most  dominant  factor  is  the  difference  in  types  of 
exercise performed in the gym influencing the use and non-
use of digital technology: exercises are inherently different 
in  the  way  that  they  are  performed  and  what  they  demand 
from  the  individual.  For  example,  the  physicality  of  the 
context  of  exercising  at  the  gym  meant  a  participant  was 
looking  for  distraction  on  their  smartphones  during  the 
‘deadtime’  between  reps  or  when  they  were  bored  on  the 
treadmill,  but  were  very  frustrated  by  any  disruption  when 
they  were  concentrating  on  form  or  particularly  when 
counting  reps  on  non-digital  resistance  machines.  Across 
the data set, exercise was found to influence the occupation 

of  physical  space,  the  physical  equipment  and  how  people 
were  feeling  in  the  moment,  and  therefore  influenced  the 
technologies available and participants’ use and non-use of 
technology. 

Beyond  the  complexity  of  the  environment,  we  found  that 
the  people  who  go  to  the  gym  can  have  very  different 
technology  needs.  There  are  many  available  technology 
choices in the gym and participants used and adopted them 
in  different  ways.  This  variety  in  use  was  related  to 
participants’  motivations  for  exercise,  their  health  goals, 
how  they  valued  exercise,  their  individual  preferences 
towards  certain  technologies,  and  simply  their  personal 
taste.  For  example,  intrinsic  motivation  to  exercise  meant 
that  participants  monitored 
in-the-moment  heart  rate 
information  or  avoided  technology  altogether  to  achieve  a 
sense  of  ‘flow’,  but  extrinsic  motivation  meant  that  other 
participants  actively  avoided  low  performance  values  on  a 
Fuelband  or  prioritized  watching  TV  on  their  phone  for 
distraction  and  therefore  did  not  use  resistance  machines. 
With  regards  to  fitness  technologies,  we  found  there  were 
differences  in  the  way  that  individuals  used  the  activity 
tracking technology, in line with Rooksby et al. [36]. 

Rather  than  independently  determining  behaviour,  the 
complexity  of  the  environment  and  the  complexity  of 
individual differences are intertwined in how they influence 
the use and non-use of technology in the gym. Non-use has 
been  gaining  attention  in  the  HCI  domain  in  recent  years 
(e.g.  [8]).  Satchell  and  Dourish  [37]  talk  about  different 
types  of  non-use  of  technology  such  as  active  resistance, 
disenchantment, and disinterest, but these categories do not 
cover  the  non-use  that  we  found  among  the  fitness 
informatics adopting participants. Our participants opted in 
and  opted  out  of  using  technology  based  on  the  type  of 
exercise  they  were  doing,  the  physical  space  afforded  near 
that  exercise,  and  the  point  they  were  at  in  a  particular 
exercise.  This  opting  in  and  opting  out  of  technology  use 
was  also  closely  linked  to  people’s  individual  differences, 
particularly their values, motivations, and preferences.  

This study took a step towards expanding our understanding 
of  the  influence  that  context  of  use  can  have  on  the 
rhythms/routines  of  the  gym  visit  and  rhythms/routines  of 
technology  use.  However,  even  with  this  targeted  scope,  it 
did not access the complete complexity of the gym context. 
This  study  involved  a  limited  amount  of  participants, 
focused  on  working  out  alone  at  the  gym  and  participants 
may  have  been  influenced  by  the  presence  of  a  researcher 
observing  them,  which  influence  its  representativeness.  If 
the study involved the recruitment of participants who come 
to  the  gym  to  exercise  with  a  partner  (or  ‘gym  buddy’)  or 
observed  people  in  group  classes,  it  might  have  uncovered 
factors relating to  how the social context influences fitness 
technology use.  

Features such as sensors and pedometers are being added to 
smartwatches under the assumption that this is what people 
want  and  are  able  to  use  throughout  different  settings, 

Wellness & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2930including  during  exercise.  In  reality,  a  large  number  of 
people  choose  the  gym  as  their  regular  source  of  physical 
activity, and this context influences what people want to use 
and  what  they  can  actually  use.  We  found  that  if 
participants want to use some of these features, they choose 
to  alter  the  way  they  exercise,  for  example  where  a 
participant with a wrist FitBit did not use the handlebars on 
the  elliptical  and  felt  unbalanced  while  gaining  pedometer 
information. Similarly, people can opt out of features of the 
technology  entirely  if  it  does  not  fit  into  their  exercise 
preferences,  as  was  the  case  where  text  notifications  were 
disabled on the Samsung Gear Fit to prevent disruption.  

This research has particular relevance to the growing trend 
for  wearable  technologies,  especially  those  geared  towards 
fitness, such as the Samsung Gear Fit or Apple Watch. The 
use of these increasingly popular technologies has not been 
comprehensively  explored  in  the  context  of  everyday  life, 
and much work still needs to be completed focusing on how 
different  aspects  of  people’s  lives  influence  use  and  non-
use,  and  how  the  use  of  the  technology  in  turn  influences 
people’s  lives.  By  using  a  situated  approach,  the  current 
study reveals use and non-use tensions that arise for fitness 
technologies that may be used in the gym, as it is a complex 
space  and  individual  differences  are  wide-ranging.  We 
should be wary of context-independent design and research 
of  wearable  technologies  that  are  meant  to  be  useful  in  all 
environments,  including  in  and  outside  of  the  gym  and  in 
conjunction  with  the  use  of  a  variety  of  other  technology. 
Wearable technology is inherently mobile and therefore its 
use  is  influenced  by  the  unfolding  and  dynamic  context  in 
which it is used, as well as the individual using it. As such, 
a  situated  approach  to  design  and  ‘in  the  wild’  evaluation 
would allow for the investigation of contextual factors that 
influence  the  various  uses  and  non-uses  of  these  emerging 
technologies. 

regards 

CONCLUSION 
The aim of this study was to investigate the use and non-use 
of technology during exercise in the gym. Through taking a 
situated  exploratory  approach  to  this  research,  it  was 
revealed that the gym context is complex and dynamic, and 
the  complexities  of  the  context  influence  the  use  and  non-
use  of  technology.  Use  and  non-use  tensions  became 
to  distraction  vs.  disruption, 
evident  with 
information  avoidance,  and 
information  needs  vs. 
technology  influencing  exercise  vs.  exercise  influencing 
technology.  People’s  choices  to  opt  in  or  opt  out  of  using 
technology  were  dependent  on  context  and  situation, 
influenced  by 
the 
individual  differences  as  well  as 
the  gym.  Values,  motivations,  and 
physicality  of 
preferences  influenced  use  and  non-use  of  technology.  On 
the  other  hand,  even  if  the  design  of  the  technology  caters 
for  the  variance  in  users,  it  cannot  be  assumed  that  the 
technology will be used in the in the same way throughout 
the exercise, for all exercises, and in the same places. This 
in 
is  because  context 

is  dynamic  and  people  react 

accordance  to  their  environment  at  that  particular  moment 
in time [18,39]. These findings point to the importance for 
future  work  to  take  a  situated  approach  to  understand, 
design  and  evaluate  technology  to  be  used  in  a  variety  of 
contexts  by  a  variety  of  individuals,  such  as  wearable 
devices for fitness. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This  research  has  been  funded  in  part  by  the  UK 
Engineering  and  Physical  Sciences  Research  Council 
CHI+MED  project  [EP/G059063/1]  with  support  from  the 
Samsung Research and Development Institute UK. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Ahtinen, A., Isomursu, M., Huhtala, Y., and Kaasinen, 

J. Tracking Outdoor Sports – User Experience 
Perspective. Ambient Intelligence, (2008), 192–209. 

2.  Ahtinen, A., Ramiah, S., Blom, J., and Isomursu, M. 
Design of Mobile Wellness Applications  : Identifying 
Cross-Cultural Factors. In Proc. OzCHI, ACM Press 
(2008), 164–171. 

3.  Ainsworth, B.E., Sternfeld, B., Slattery, M.L., Daguisé, 
V., and Zahm, S.H. Physical activity and breast cancer: 
evaluation of physical activity assessment methods. 
Cancer 83, 3 Suppl (1998), 611–20. 

4.  Albinali, F., Intille, S., Haskell, W., and Rosenberger, 
M. Using wearable activity type detection to improve 
physical activity energy expenditure estimation. In 
Proc. UbiComp 2010, ACM Press (2010), 311. 

5.  Annesi, J.J. Effects of music, television, and a 

combination entertainment system on distraction, 
exercise adherence, and physical output in adults. Can. 
J. of Behavioural Science 33, 3 (2001) 193. 

6.  Anshel, M.H. and Marisi, D.Q. Effect of Music and 

Rhythm on Physical Performance. Res. Quart. Am. All. 
for Health, Phys. Ed. and Rec. 49, 2 (1978), 109–113. 

7.  Bardram, J.E. Plans as Situated Action  : An Activity 
Theory Approach to Workflow Systems. In Proc. 
ECSCW 1997, Springer (1997), 17-32.  

8.  Baumer, E.P.S., Ames, M.G., Brubaker, J.R., Burrell, J., 
and Dourish, P. Refusing, Limiting, Departing: Why We 
Should Study Technology Non-use. In Proc. CHI EA 
2014, ACM Press (2014), 65–68. 

9.  Blythe, M. and Monk, A. Notes towards an ethnography 
of domestic technology. In Proc. DIS 2002, ACM Press 
(2002), 277. 

10. Braun, V. and Clarke, V. Using thematic analysis in 
psychology. Qualitative research in psychology 3, 2 
(2006), 77–101. 

11. Brown, B., McGregor, M., and Laurier, E. iPhone in 

Vivo: Video Analysis of Mobile Device Use. In Proc. 
CHI 2013, ACM (2013), 1031–1040. 

Wellness & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea293112. Buttussi, F., Chittaro, L., and Nadalutti, D. Bringing 

mobile guides and fitness activities together  : a solution 
based on an embodied virtual trainer. In Proc. Mobile 
HCI 2006, ACM. (2006), 29-36. 

27. Lin, J.J., Mamykina, L., Lindtner, S., Delajoux, G., and 
Strub, H.B. Fish ’ n ’ Steps  : Encouraging Physical 
Activity with an Interactive Computer Game. UbiComp 
(2006), 261–278. 

13. Cobb, L.E., Stone, W.J., Anonsen, L.J., and Klein, D. a. 
The Influence of Goal Setting on Exercise Adherence. J. 
of Health Ed. 31, 5 (2000), 277–281. 

28. Moran, T.P. and Dourish, P. Introduction to this special 
issue on context-aware computing. HCI 16, 2-4 (2001), 
87–95. 

14. Consolvo, S., Harrison, B., Smith, I., et al. Conducting 

In Situ Evaluations for and With Ubiquitous Computing 
Technologies. IJHCI 22, 1-2 (2007), 103–118. 

29. Nylander, S., Tholander, J., Mueller, F., and Marshall, 
J. HCI and sports. In Proc. CHI EA 2014, ACM Press 
(2014), 115–118. 

15. Consolvo, S., Libby, R., Smith, I., et al. Activity sensing 
in the wild. In Proc. CHI 2008, ACM Press (2008), 
1797. 

16. Corbin, J.M. and Strauss, A. Grounded theory research: 
Procedures, canons, and evaluative criteria. Qual. Soc. 
13, 1 (1990), 3–21. 

17. Csikszentmihalyi, M. and Csikszentmihalyi, S. Optimal 

Experience: Psychological Studies of Flow in 
Consciousness. Cambridge University Press, 1992. 

18. Dourish, P. What we talk about when we talk about 
context. Per. and Ubiq. Comput. 8, 1 (2004), 19–30. 

19. Fritz, T., Huang, E.M., Murphy, G.C., and 

Zimmermann, T. Persuasive Technology in the Real 
World  : A Study of Long-Term Use of Activity Sensing 
Devices for Fitness. In Proc. CHI 2014, ACM (2014), 
487–496. 

20. Future Fit Training. The UK Fitness Industry Report - 

commentary. 2013. http://www.futurefit.co.uk/personal-
training/news-and-views/2013/10/02/uk-fitness-
industry-report/. 

21. Gittleson, K. BBC News - Can Nike’s Fuelband really 

motivate you to exercise? 2013. 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-24543910 

22. Goodman, E. Seeing fit  : Visualizing physical activity in 
context. In Proc. CHI EA 2006, ACM (2006), 797–802. 

23. Gupta, N. and Jilla, S. Digital Fitness Connector: Smart 
Wearable System. In Proc. ICI 2011, IEEE (2011), 
118–121. 

24. Hartson, H.R. and Pyla, P.S. The UX Book: process and 

guidelines for ensuring a quality user experience. 
Elsevier, Amsterdam  ; Boston, 2012. 

25. Holtzblatt, K. and Jones, S. Contextual inquiry: A 

participatory technique for system design. Participatory 
design, (1993), 180–193. 

26. Karageorghis, C.I. and Priest, D.-L. Music in the 

exercise domain: a review and synthesis (Part I). Int. 
Review of sport and exercise psych. 5, 1 (2012), 44–66. 

30. O’Kane, A.A., Rogers, Y., and Blandford, A.E. Gaining 
empathy for non-routine mobile device use through 
autoethnography. In Proc. CHI 2014, ACM Press 
(2014), 987–990. 

31. Oulasvirta, A., Kurvinen, E., and Kankainen, T. 

Understanding Contexts by Being There: Case Studies 
in Bodystorming. Per. Ubiq. Comput. 7, 2 (2003), 125–
134. 

32. Pelletier, Luc G., Michelle S. Fortier, Robert J. 

Vallerand, Kim M. Tuson, Nathalie M. Briere, M.R.B. 
Toward a new measure of intrinsic motivation, extrinsic 
motivation, and amotivation in sports: The Sport 
Motivation Scale (SMS). J. Sport & Exercise Psych. 17, 
35–53. 

33. Petosa, R.L. and Holtz, B. Flow for Exercise 

Adherence: Testing an Intrinsic Model of Health 
Behavior. Amer. J. Health Edu. 44, 5 (2013), 273–277. 

34. Potteiger, J.A., Schroeder, J.M., and Goff, K.L. 

Influence of music on ratings of perceived exertion 
during 20 minutes of moderate intensity exercise. 
Perceptual and motor skills 91, 3 Pt 1 (2000), 848–54. 

35. Rogers, Y. Interaction design gone wild: striving for 

wild theory. Interactions 18, 4 (2011), 58. 

36. Rooksby, J., Rost, M., Morrison, A., and Chalmers, 

M.C. Personal tracking as lived informatics. In Proc. 
CHI 2014, (2014), 1163–1172. 

37. Satchell, C. and Dourish, P. Beyond the User: Use and 
Non-use in HCI. In Proc. OZCHI 2009, ACM (2009), 
9–16. 

38. Speck, B.J. and Looney, S.W. Effects of a minimal 
intervention to increase physical activity in women: 
daily activity records. Nursing Research 50, 6 (2001), 
374–8. 

39. Suchman, L. Plans and Situated Actions. Cambridge 

University Press, 1987. 

40. Vallerand, R.J. and Losier, G.F. An integrative analysis 
of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation in sport. J. Applied 
Sport Psych. 11, 1 (1999), 142–169.   

Wellness & WearablesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2932 
