Crumbs: Lightweight Daily Food Challenges 
to Promote Engagement and Mindfulness 
Daniel A. Epstein1, Felicia Cordeiro1, James Fogarty1, Gary Hsieh2, Sean A. Munson2 
1Computer Science & Engineering, 2Human Centered Design & Engineering 
DUB Group, University of Washington 
{depstein, felicia0, jfogarty}@cs.washington.edu, {garyhs, smunson}@uw.edu 

ABSTRACT 
Many people struggle with efforts to make healthy behavior 
changes, such as healthy eating. Several existing approaches 
promote healthy eating, but present  high barriers and yield 
limited engagement. As a lightweight alternative approach to 
promoting mindful eating, we introduce and examine crumbs: 
daily food challenges completed by consuming one food that 
meets the challenge. We examine crumbs through developing 
and  deploying  the  iPhone  application  Food4Thought.  In  a 
3-week  field  study  with  61  participants,  crumbs  supported 
engagement and mindfulness while offering opportunities to 
learn about food. Our 2x2 study compared nutrition versus 
non-nutrition crumbs coupled with social versus non-social 
features.  Nutrition  crumbs  often  felt  more  purposeful  to 
participants, but non-nutrition crumbs increased mindfulness 
more  than  nutrition  crumbs.  Social  features  helped  sustain 
engagement  and  were  important  for  engagement  with 
non-nutrition crumbs. Social features also enabled learning 
about the variety of foods other people use to meet a challenge. 

Author Keywords 
Food; daily challenges; mindfulness; personal informatics. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI). 

INTRODUCTION 
Daily  interventions  such  as  reminders,  tips,  or  challenges, 
are a popular and effective method for promoting a variety 
of aspects of well-being [11,35]. Challenges provide small, 
achievable goals that give a clear indication of whether they 
have  been  completed,  and  can  support  competition  or  fun. 
Daily challenges have been shown to promote behavior change 
[11] and provide feedback on efforts toward larger goals [12]. 

Mindfulness focuses attention on the present activities [23] 
and  can  lead  to  healthier  behaviors.  In  our  focus  on  food, 
we build upon a definition of mindfulness as “non-judgmental 
awareness of physical and emotional sensations associated 
with  eating”  [19].  Mindfulness  is  therefore  explicitly  not 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CHI'16, May 07-12, 2016, San Jose, CA, USA  
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3362-7/16/05…$15.00 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858044 

corrective, does not make behavior change recommendations, 
and does not judge food “good” or “bad.” Food mindfulness 
can help people understand why they eat [19,42], cope with 
cravings  [1],  avoid  eating  disorders  [5,24],  and  manage 
obesity  [24,34].  Successful  methods  for  promoting  food 
mindfulness have included hosting information sessions and 
discussions  [5,24]  and  providing  people  with  manuals  [1]. 
Other common food tracking techniques, such as journaling, 
can also promote mindfulness of food choices [6,10,14,27,41]. 
However, people find food journals difficult and burdensome, 
often  feel  judged  by  tracking  tools,  and  report  abandoning 
their efforts due to these feelings of judgment [14,15]. 

lightweight 

We  draw  on  research  on  daily  challenges  [35,41]  and 
photo-based  food  journaling  [6,14]  to  develop  the  concept 
of  crumbs: 
food-based  daily  challenges. 
A crumb  is  a  daily  challenge  that  a  person  completes  by 
taking  a  picture  of  and  consuming  one  food  or  meal  that 
meets  the  challenge  requirement.  We  design  and  evaluate 
four variants of an experience using crumbs: examining the 
role of a social experience in daily food challenges and the 
nutritional nature of those challenges. 

We  also  incorporate  successful  social  features  found  in 
other  self-tracking  domains,  such  as  leaderboards  and 
competition [12,40] or forums [37] in physical activity. We 
assess  the  value  of  social  features  in  our  current  approach 
by comparing a personal version of the crumbs intervention 
with  a  version  in  which  people  post  pictures  of  completed 
crumbs  to  a  shared  Facebook  group.  Although  prior  work 
suggests  social  experiences  can  help  or  hurt  participation 
[15,17,30,31],  we  hypothesize  that  providing  a  social 
experience  among  people  completing  the  same  crumb  can 
help people stay engaged with the intervention. 

Noting  arguments  in  research  for  both  prescriptive  and 
open-ended wellness applications, we develop and evaluate 
two  types  of  crumbs.  A nutrition  crumb  is  nutritionally 
prescriptive (e.g., “Eat something high in fiber”). In contrast, 
non-nutrition  crumbs  are  prescriptive,  but  not  about  the 
nutritional content (e.g., “Eat something that reminds you of 
your childhood”). We hypothesize non-nutrition crumbs can 
provide  mindfulness  benefits  while  potentially  embracing 
the celebratory nature of  food [22] and not  making people 
feel as judged about nutritional choices and intake [14,15]. 

These  features  are  combined  into  an  iPhone  application, 
Food4Thought.  We  evaluate  our  designs  in  a  three-week 
field  experiment  with  61  participants,  divided  into  a  2x2 

Food as Method and Inquiry#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5632design  comparing  social  vs.  non-social  interventions  and 
nutrition vs. non-nutrition crumbs. We evaluate participant 
engagement, mindfulness, and changes in foods consumed.  

We found that crumbs generally supported mindfulness and 
offered opportunities to learn about food. Participants  who 
received nutrition crumbs reported they more often learned 
about the nutritional makeup of their food, but participants 
who  received  non-nutritional  crumbs  reported  larger  gains 
in  eating  mindfulness.  Social  features  helped  sustain 
engagement, were particularly important to engagement with 
non-nutrition  crumbs,  and  created  an  opportunity  to  learn 
about the variety of foods people use to complete a challenge.  

The primary contributions of this work include: 
•  We  introduce  and  evaluate  the  concept  of  a  crumb: 

a lightweight food-related daily challenge.  

•  Our results offer important insights into creating effective 
daily food challenges. A more nutritionally prescriptive 
challenge may result in people learning more about their 
nutrition,  while  a  more  creative  and  fun  challenge  may 
be more effective in improving mindfulness. 

•  We build upon existing research on the benefits of social 
features  in  self-tracking  apps.  We  demonstrate  the 
benefit  of  social  features  in  supporting  engagement, 
highlighting  how  these  features  increase  the  sense  of 
motivation  and  accountability  while  also  providing 
opportunities to learn from other participants. 

BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 
Many  people  seek  to  improve  their  diet  in  some  way,  and 
many  approaches  have  been  developed  to  help  people  in 
this general goal. These include more prescriptive techniques 
(e.g., following a specific diet or reaching certain goals for 
nutritional  content)  as  well  more  open-ended  techniques 
(e.g.,  mindfulness  exercises  or  journaling  food  eaten 
without  other  specific  requirements  about  what  is  eaten). 
Regardless  of  technique,  awareness  of  food  and  the  act  of 
eating is typically a key component of the intervention.   

In  developing  and  evaluating  crumbs  and  Food4Thought, 
we were motivated by research on the benefits and challenges 
of food journaling, the benefits of increased food mindfulness, 
and  the  potential  of  daily  goals  and  social  features  to 
promote engagement. We now review this literature.  

interviews  and  questionnaires 

Food Journaling 
Food journaling is one of the most commonly recommended 
techniques  for  gaining  awareness  of  food  eaten  and  for 
self-regulation of diet. Early food journaling methods used 
lengthy 
to  collect  an 
understanding  of  patient  eating  habits  [28].  Paper  diaries 
were later introduced, assisting recall by allowing people to 
record  food  nearer  to  the  time  of  eating.  Mobile  food 
tracking  applications  have  more  recently  become available, 
and many people prefer them to paper diaries [8]. 

Despite the prevalence of journaling,  food journalers often 
find  it  tedious  to  keep  an  accurate  record  of  all  food 
consumed, and often fall out of the habit [15]. To reduce the 

research  has  examined 

burden, 
tracking  only  meal 
components (e.g., vegetables, grains) [3], taking meal photos 
[6,10,14],  or  marking  a  meal  as  “healthy”  or  not  [29]. 
Byrne et al.  demonstrated  the  potential  for  an  intervention 
to change eating habits based on one photo of food per day. 
Adolescents used their app to take a photo of their breakfast, 
and then used these photos to take care of a virtual pet [10].  

People  can  also  give  up  journaling  food  or  become 
frustrated  with  it  because  it  makes  them  feel  judged.  In 
particular,  the  emphasis  on  quantification  and  calorie 
budgets  in  many  journals  can  also  create  feelings  of 
judgment that lead people to abandon journaling [14,15].  

Eating Mindfulness 
Mindful  eating  interventions  are  another  technique  that  also 
focuses on attention and awareness [23]. Mindfulness focuses 
attention  on  present  experiences  without  judgment  and 
without  saying  what  the  experience  should  be  [19,23]. 
Mindfulness interventions are not based in “good” or “bad”, 
nor  in  prescriptive  behavior  change.  Framson  et  al.  define 
eating mindfulness as “non-judgmental awareness of physical 
and  emotional  sensations  associated  with  eating”  [19]. 
Eating  mindfulness  practices  have  been  found  to  decrease 
cravings [1] and reduce BMI for those overweight [24,34]. 

Many  mindful  eating  programs  have  taken  a  Cognitive 
Behavioral  Therapy  approach  to  helping  people  identify 
and  adopt  healthier  habits.  These  often  involve  in-person 
sessions  [24]  or  daily  home  mindfulness  exercises  [2], 
spanning multiple months. These mindfulness interventions 
are  designed  to  mitigate  serious  eating  disorders,  and  are 
fairly time-consuming and demanding of participants. 

Supporting Engagement & Reducing Barriers in Tracking 
In  this  research,  we  strive  to  address  two  barriers  people 
encounter when engaging with common food interventions. 
To  do  so,  we  design  an  intervention  that  imposes  lower 
burdens and that people perceive as less judgmental.  

To address our first goal, we draw upon research in small, 
daily challenges and upon research in social engagement.  

Engaging with Small, Daily Challenges 
Setting small, achievable goals is a key strategy for behavior 
change  (i.e.,  take  small  steps  [18]).  Goal-setting  theory 
further  suggests  people  exert  the  most  effort  when  given 
specific  goals  [26]. Concrete  challenges remove ambiguity 
about  whether  and  when  goals  are  attained.  Publicizing 
completion  of  challenges  enables  public  celebration  of 
achievement, which further increases its salience [13]. 

The use of daily goals has been explored in various research 
projects  and  commercial  products.  Many  physical  activity 
applications suggest daily goals (e.g., Houston [12], FitBit). 
These daily goals tend to be basic and repetitive (e.g., number 
of steps or active minutes per day). Such goals are effective 
when tracking requires little effort and feedback is persistent 
[12],  but  more  varied  and  interesting  goals  may  support 
greater engagement and learning opportunities over time. 

Food as Method and Inquiry#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5633The  Daily  Challenge  program  [11]  is  one  example  of  a 
wellness program based on varied, small goals. This program 
presented  participants  with  a  challenge  each  day,  such  as 
reading about where they should store fruit, taking the stairs 
at  work,  learning  about  the  salt  content  of  their  lunch,  or 
learning about a local issue. In a 30-day trial, participants in 
this program had greater improvements in well-being scores 
than participants who received an e-health newsletter [11].  

Importantly, we did not design crumbs to replace journaling 
of all foods for people working to achieve a specific nutrition 
budget.  Crumbs  require  people  engage  in  only  one  daily 
challenge,  which  consists  of  photographing  just  one  food 
selection that meets the challenge’s requirements. Informed 
by results on daily challenges [11] and Byrne et al.’s success 
with using daily food photos to motivate behavior change in 
youth,  we  anticipated  that  this  design  of  crumbs  could 
present  lower  barriers  but  still  be  sufficient  to  result  in 
benefits for people generally seeking to improve their eating.  

Social Features and Engagement  
Prior  research  also  examines  social  features  for  increasing 
engagement  in  technology-mediated  health  and  wellness 
interventions.  Social  features  have  been  used  to  increase 
emotional support, informational support, accountability, and 
motivation  [17].  These  include  sharing  goals  and  progress 
with  one’s  social  network  [16,30,31]  or  on  peer  support 
communities (e.g., [6,12], FitBit) and providing opportunities 
to discuss barriers and ask questions in support forums [37]. 
Results have been mixed: social features sometimes lead to 
greater  engagement  or  participation 
(e.g., [37]),  but 
sometimes have no effect because participants are reluctant 
to  use  social  features  (e.g., [32]),  or  sometimes  the  effects 
cancel each other out (e.g., [31]). 

Grouping people who have a common goal has been shown 
to motivate participation in mobile-social health applications 
[7]. Other studies have placed people in groups with shared 
goals  as  a  way  to  create  a  shared  experience,  sense  of 
togetherness,  and  sometimes  competition  (e.g.,  [25]). 
The Daily  Challenge  website  allows  participants  to  form 
social  ties  with  other  participants,  and  then  to  see  who 
among  their  connections  has  completed  each  challenge. 
Researchers found participants who were socially connected 
completed 1.85 times as  many challenges as those  without 
social ties [35]. However, participants were not randomized 
into social or non-social conditions, so it was impossible to 
determine  if  the  social  connections  increased  engagement 
or if the increased engagement and social connections were 
instead both a consequence of higher interest in the activity. 
In this study, we test that casual connection. 

Prescriptive vs. Non-Prescriptive 
To address the second barrier (i.e., that interventions can be 
perceived as judgmental, contributing to abandonment), we 
build upon prior research suggesting activities may not need 
to  be  prescriptive  to  promote  mindfulness.  The  designers  of 
VERA  argue  that  open-ended  systems  which  encourage 
reflection can offer flexibility that may appeal to people [6]. 

Grimes  and  Harper  argue  the  design  space  for  health  and 
wellness  systems  should  include  celebratory  technology, 
incorporating positive interactions people have with food to 
allow  room  for  creativity  and  pleasure  [22].  O’Hara et al. 
describe  using  photo  mementos  of  meals  as  one  such 
technology [33]. Instead of limiting daily goals to nutrition-
based or health-oriented challenges (e.g., “eat 100 grams of 
fiber”), it may be just as beneficial to offer more fun, open-
ended challenges (e.g., “eat something purple”). As a result, 
we  designed  and  evaluated  both  nutritionally  prescriptive 
and non-nutritionally prescriptive crumbs.  

Research Questions  
We designed a study to explore and evaluate different points 
in  the  design  space  for  lightweight  daily  food  challenges. 
We  sought  to  design  engaging  food  tracking  experiences 
that  would 
improve  eating  mindfulness  and  provide 
opportunities  to  learn  about  food.  We  selected  eating 
mindfulness  as  an  outcome  because  it  can  support  many 
healthy  eating  goals  and  is  not  tied  to  any  single  food 
outcome (e.g., achieving a calorie budget). It can therefore 
benefit a broad range of people. 

We specifically investigated the following research questions: 

RQ1.  Do  crumbs  (i.e.,  lightweight  daily  food  challenges), 
offer  an  engaging  food  tracking  experience  that  results  in 
food mindfulness and learning? 

We  hypothesized  that  crumbs  can  support  an  engaging 
experience and would benefit mindfulness and learning. 

RQ2. Does (a) engagement or (b) mindfulness differ whether 
participants receive nutritionally prescriptive challenges or 
challenges that are not nutritionally prescriptive?  

We had competing hypotheses. Non-nutrition crumbs might 
be more fun and engaging, as they are less prescriptive and 
allow participants to reflect on or celebrate their behaviors, 
leading to greater mindfulness. On the other hand, nutrition 
crumbs  may  promote  greater  consideration  of  the  health 
consequences of food choices and thus greater mindfulness. 
We also believed nutrition crumbs might provoke additional 
opportunities to learn about the nutritional makeup of foods, 
often considered a benefit of traditional food journal methods. 

RQ3.  Does  a  discussion  board  supporting  conversation 
about  challenges  and  sharing  challenge  achievement  with 
other participants (a) change engagement in the challenges 
or (b) result in different mindfulness outcomes?  

We  hypothesized  social  features  would  lead  to  greater 
engagement  and  thus  greater  mindfulness.  We  further 
believed  social  features  would  provide  opportunities  for 
participants to learn from each other. 

SYSTEM DESIGN 
To  evaluate  crumbs  as  tools  for  engagement,  mindfulness, 
and learning, we developed the mobile food journaling app 
Food4Thought. Rather than requiring tedious tracking of all 
foods, it encourages journaling one food or meal a day that 

Food as Method and Inquiry#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5634meets  a  daily  challenge.  The  system  has  two  components: 
(1)  a mobile  photo-based  food  journaling  app,  and  (2)  a 
private Facebook group to which photos meeting the day’s 
challenge  are  posted.  We  selected  Facebook  as  the  social 
platform because it incorporates the app into many people’s 
routines.  It  offers  methods  for  encouragement  (e.g.,  likes, 
comments)  and  communication  (e.g.,  comments).  People 
also see Food4Thought posts when accessing Facebook for 
other reasons. Because the Facebook group was private, posts 
were  only  visible  to  others  in  the  study,  creating  a  cohort 
effect similar to other systems (e.g., [6,7,12,25,35], FitBit). 

The mobile app displays a notification of the day’s crumb at 
a  configurable  time  (default  9am),  a  lesson  learned  from 
other journaling systems [9]. A person completes a challenge 
by  taking  a  picture  of  a  food  they  ate  (Figure  1a,  1b), 
indicating whether it meets the day’s challenge, and adding 
an  optional  message.  A  person  can  look  back  at  the 
previous  day’s  challenges  (Figure  1e)  and  at  all  pictures 
they have taken with the app (Figure 1f). If an entry meets 
the  challenge,  the  picture  and  message  are  sent  to  the 
Facebook group (Figure 1d). Photos are posted to a separate 
album for each day’s challenge, and each photo appears in 
the  group’s  feed.  At  midnight  each  day,  Food4Thought 
automatically  posts  the  number  of  people  who  completed 
the previous day’s challenge and a link to the corresponding 
album. This allows seeing an overview of food others ate to 
complete the challenges, which later sections will discuss as 
an important element of the design. 

CRUMB DEVELOPMENT AND SELECTION 
We  define  a  crumb  as  a  food-related  challenge  completed 
by  consuming  one  food  or  meal  that  meets  the  challenge. 
Crumbs begin with a statement of “Eat something …” and 
end with an attribute of food (e.g., “Eat something crunchy”). 
To accomplish a crumb, a person must eat a food with that 
characteristic by the end of the day. This small, actionable 
challenge requires additional thought about food consumed 
to  complete  it,  and  could  therefore  increase  mindfulness. 
Crumbs also provide opportunities for food journaling to be 
fun, social, or competitive while supporting learning. 

Nutritionally and Non-Nutritionally Prescriptive Crumbs 
We designed and studied two types of crumbs: nutritionally 
prescriptive  and  non-nutritionally  prescriptive.  A  nutrition 
crumb  is  a  challenge  that  requires  thinking  about  the 
nutritional makeup of food (e.g., the amount of protein, low 
sugar,  high  fiber).  A  specific  example  is  “Eat  something 
high  in  vitamin  B-12.”  We chose  this  type  of  crumb  to  be 
consistent  with  nutritional  information  tracked  in  current 
food journaling applications.  

Inspired by prior work [6,22], we designed non-nutritionally 
prescriptive  crumbs  to  promote  a  less  corrective  and  more 
creative  approach  to  healthy  eating.  A  non-nutrition  crumb 
emphasizes general food attributes (e.g., color or shape, the 
letter  a  food  begins  with,  a  food’s  preparation).  A specific 
example is “Eat something that is triangular.” Non-nutrition 
crumbs  may  imply  nutritional  values  (e.g.,  “Eat  something 

(e) 

(f) 

(a)

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

Figure 1. Food4Thought is a mobile food journaling app 
providing daily challenges and a historical log of food photos. 
We developed four versions based on a 2x2 design comparing 
(a) nutrition and (b) non-nutrition crumbs, and (c) non-social 
and (d) social interventions. Food4Thought included looking 
back at (e) completed challenges and (f) all pictures taken. 
cooked in a microwave”, “Eat something that is a dessert”), 
but  are  not  nutritionally  prescriptive.  A  person  completing 
these  crumbs  may  still  make  nutritionally  beneficial  choices 
(e.g., reheated roasted vegetables, nonfat yogurt), although it 
is not required (e.g., a pizza roll, an ice cream sundae). 

Two  members  of  the  research  team  generated  202  total 
crumbs.  We  found  it  easier  to  ideate  for  non-nutritionally 
prescriptive  crumbs,  and  so  we  unintentionally  generated 
unequal  numbers  of  the  two  categories:  42  nutrition  and 
160  non-nutrition.  The  supplementary  materials  contain  a 
full list of crumbs generated. 

Verification of Crumb Categories 
People  have  varying  beliefs  about  nutrition,  and  validity  of 
our experiment required the crumbs in each category reliably 
be considered as nutritionally prescriptive or non-nutritionally 
prescriptive.  To  verify  and  categorize  our  crumbs,  we 
obtained  opinions  from  people  on  Amazon  Mechanical 
Turk.  We  required  Turkers  have  a  90%+  HIT  acceptance 
rate and at least 100 HITs approved. Given food’s cultural 
nature, we required all Turkers be from the United States to 
ensure  some  similarity  in  food  background.  Each  HIT 
required  rating  five  different  crumbs  presented  on  a  single 
page.  We  paid  Turkers  $0.15  per  HIT.  Turkers  rated  each 
crumb according to their agreement with several statements 
on  5-item  Likert  scales.  Statements  included:  (1) “I  could 
easily complete this challenge”, (2) “This challenge would be 
difficult to complete”, and (3) “This challenge requires me to 
think about the nutritional makeup of food.” 

To  identify  spam  responses,  we  asked  both  (1)  “easily 
complete” and (2) “difficult to complete” as questions about 
opposites,  to  filter  responses  from  Turkers  who  responded 
similarly to both questions. We removed all responses where 
Turkers agreed or disagreed with both questions (i.e., on the 
same  side of  a 3 rating on our 5-item  Likert scale, labeled 
as “neutral”). We also removed all responses from a Turker 
if they gave the same Likert value across all statements for 

Food as Method and Inquiry#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5635 
 
 
 
 
 
Nutrition 

Non-Nutrition 

Social  S+N+ 

Non-Social S−N+ 

N=18: 5M, 13F 
Age: avg 30.17, 
min 22, max 59 
N=10: 2M, 8F 
Age: avg 26.78, 
min 19, max 36 

S+N− 

S−N− 

N=22: 4M, 18F 
Age: avg 27.64, 
min 18, max 65 
N=11: 2M, 9F 
Age: avg 27.20, 
min 18, max 40 

Table 1. Our field study had four conditions, with participants 
randomly assigned, weighted toward the social conditions. 

five  or  more  crumbs.  In  total,  we  removed  7.84%  of 
responses as spam. After spam removal, an average of 14.3 
Turkers (min: 9, max: 19) evaluated each crumb. 

Filtering and Categorizing Crumbs 
Before categorizing crumbs as nutrition or non-nutrition, we 
filtered out potentially controversial crumbs to ensure a clear 
distinction.  For  a  crumb  to  be  controversial:  (1) the median 
“nutritional  makeup”  rating  from  all  Turkers  must  be  a 
neutral 3, or (2) the interquartile range must be greater than 
two,  indicating  high  variance  in  Turker  responses.  We 
categorized 42 crumbs as controversial (8 by  first criterion, 
34  by  the  second,  totaling  20.8%).  We  did  not  use  these 
crumbs in our field study of Food4Thought. 

Remaining crumbs were grouped by median rating of their 
“nutritional makeup.” Crumbs with a median greater than 3 
were grouped as “nutrition” (53 crumbs) and the remaining 
as  “non-nutrition”  (107  crumbs).  For  149  (93%)  crumbs, 
Turkers agreed with the research team’s initial assessment. 
The  remaining  11  (7%)  were  categorized  differently 
(“vegan”,  “vegetarian”,  “organic”,  “fresh  and  in-season”, 
“grain,” “starchy,” “colorless,” “salty,” “citrus,” “you would 
eat  before  running,”  “cooked  in  a  healthy  oil”).  Turkers 
believed these challenges required considering the nutritional 
makeup of food, while the research team had not. 

We believe the majority of the controversial and differently 
categorized  crumbs  arose  from  Turkers  thinking  through, 
and  subsequently  rating,  which  food  they  might  eat  to 
complete  the  crumb,  rather  than  rating  the  crumb  itself. 
For example,  the  challenge  “Eat  something  yellow”  might 
lead  a  person  to  think  of  a  banana.  If  they  consider  this  a 
nutritional  fruit,  they  may  deem  the  challenge  to  be 
nutritional.  However,  the  challenge  does  not  prescribe 
something healthy and could also be met with a lemon tart. 

FIELD STUDY OF LIGHTWEIGHT DAILY FOOD CHALLENGES 
We conducted a 3-week field deployment of Food4Thought 
with  61  participants,  split  in  four  groups  in  a  2x2  design: 
receiving  nutrition  (N+)  or  non-nutrition  crumbs  (N−),  and 
being in a Facebook group social (S+) or a non-social (S−) 
condition. Participant demographics appear in Table 1. 

Participants and Crumb Selection 
We  recruited  from  Facebook,  Twitter,  and  university  and 
local  mailing  lists,  describing  our  study  as  “using  a  food 
application  with  a  random  daily  challenge.”  Participants 
needed  to  have  a  Facebook  account,  own  and  use  an 
iPhone,  and  remain  in  North  America  during  the  study  
(to keep similar time zones within the Facebook group and 
to ensure similar food opportunities). 

Day 

Nutrition Crumbs  
(Eat something…) 

Non-nutrition Crumbs 
(Eat something…) 

1  high in fiber. 
2  low in sugar. 
3  high in vitamin C. 
4  under 4 grams of saturated fat. 
5  low in sodium. 
6  with at least 20 grams of protein. 
7  that is organic. 
8  low in carbs. 
9  that is salty. 
10  that is good for your eyes. 
11  that you would eat before running. 
12  that is whole-grain. 
13  high in potassium. 
14  high in Omega-3. 
15  that is dairy-free. 
16  that is colorless. 
17  that is good for your liver. 
18  low on the glycemic index. 
19  that is vegan. 
20  high in vitamin A. 
21  that is good for your hair. 

that is homemade. 
that starts with the letter 'A'. 
cooked on a skillet. 
that is spicy. 
that is yellow. 
that reminds you of your teenage years. 
that you would eat in the spring. 
that starts with the letter 'S'. 
that is a dessert. 
that is squishy. 
that is room-temperature. 
that you would eat on a picnic. 
that starts with the letter 'Q'. 
from a package. 
that is sour. 
traditionally French. 
that is blue. 
that you would eat on Halloween. 
that starts with the letter 'W'. 
cooked in an oven. 
that you have never tried before. 

Table  2.  Participants  received  daily  crumbs  for  3  weeks, 
and were assigned to nutrition or non-nutrition conditions. 
We  stratified  participants  by  Facebook  use,  ensuring  each 
social  condition  had  equal  proportions  of  people  who 
regularly  posted  to  and  read  their  Facebook  timelines. 
Three people had limited Internet access, so we placed them 
in the non-social groups such that unreliable Facebook access 
would  not  weaken  the  social  intervention.  Beyond  this, 
condition assignment was made randomly. Groups contained 
unequal numbers of participants to ensure social groups had 
critical mass. Groups were assigned during recruitment, and 
some participants did not complete recruitment. Six did not 
start  the  study  after  recruitment  (4  S+N+,  1  S+N−,  1 S−N+): 
three  did  not  install  Food4Thought,  two  did  not  log in,  and 
one  dropped  out  after  learning  she  was  pregnant.  This 
participant  reported  that  food  photos  in  her  Facebook  feed 
were incompatible with her pregnancy-related nausea. 

Using the results from the Mechanical Turk evaluation, we 
selected  challenges  to  integrate  into  Food4Thought  based 
on  our  split  of  nutrition  and  non-nutrition  crumbs.  Within 
the split, challenges were randomly selected (Table 2). 

Procedure 
The study consisted of a pre-study survey, a three-week field 
deployment, a post-study survey, and an optional post-study 
interview. Participants installed Food4Thought on their own 
phones.  They  were  compensated  $30  and  required  only  to 
complete the surveys and leave Food4Thought installed for 
the duration of the study, so challenges would appear daily. 
Crumb  completion  was  not  financially  incentivized,  and 
most participants did not complete all crumbs received. 

initial  survey  contained 

instructions, 
The 
demographic questions, and questions regarding prior food 
journaling  experience.  The  final  survey  contained  multiple 
choice  and  Likert-type  questions  about  experiences  using 
Food4Thought. Both are available in supplementary materials. 

installation 

To  better  understand  experiences  with  Food4Thought  and 
crumbs,  we  also  interviewed  19  participants  about  their 

Food as Method and Inquiry#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5636 
 
 
 
their 

experiences (6 S+N+, 6 S+N−, 4 S−N+, 3 S−N−). We selected 
to 
interview  participants  based  on 
open-ended  questions 
the  post-survey  (we  sought 
participants  who  enjoyed  or  disliked  aspects  of  the  study), 
activity  in  the  social  groups,  and  varied  uses  of  the 
application  (such  as  journaling  all  food  consumed).  An 
external  service  transcribed  interview  recordings,  and  the 
research team identified themes and representative quotes. 

responses 

in 

Measures and Evaluation Metrics 

Engagement 
We recorded the number of food photos taken with the app 
(including those marked as completing daily challenges and 
those not). Social engagement in the  social conditions  was 
observed by reading Facebook comments and likes. Usage 
data was supplemented with survey and interview findings. 

Eating Mindfulness 
To evaluate the impact of Food4Thought as a  mindfulness 
intervention, we compared scores pre- and post-intervention 
on  the  Fred  Hutchinson  Mindful  Eating  Scale,  a  validated 
scale for mindful eating behaviors [19]. The authors of the 
scale describe it as “non-judgmental awareness of physical 
and emotional sensations associated with eating.” This scale 
asks  people  about  their  observations  and  actions  around 
eating,  two  key  principles  in  mindfulness.  In  contrast  to 
other eating scales (e.g., the emotional eating scale [4], the 
three-factor  eating  questionnaire  [39],  the  binge-eating 
questionnaire [20]), it is general purpose and does not measure 
a  particular  nutritional  goal  or  problem.  It  is  therefore 
well-suited to participant goals of generally healthy eating.   

Questions ask about the frequency of certain food behaviors 
on a 4-point scale (from Never/Rarely to Usually/Always), of 
how  aware  a  person  is  of  their  food  when  they  are  eating 
(e.g.,  “I  notice  when  there  are  subtle  flavors  in  the  food  I 
eat”),  what  distracts  them  from  eating  (e.g.,  “My  thoughts 
tend to wander while I am eating”), and external factors that 
contribute to them eating (e.g., “I recognize when I’m eating 
and not hungry”). We used this scale to answer RQ2b and 
RQ3b. We used three questions from each of the awareness, 
distraction, and external scales to reduce time burden of the 
survey. We did not include questions for scales less relevant 
to our research questions, specifically disinhibition (i.e., “the 
inability  to  stop  eating  even  when  full”)  and  emotional 
(i.e., “eating in response to negative emotional states”) scales.  

To assist interpretation of these scales, we note that people 
currently  completing  at  least  two  hours  of  yoga  per  week 
score  0.30  better  on  the  summary  score  of  the  Mindful 
Eating Scale (i.e., an average of the subscores), while people 
who  have  practiced  yoga  for  at  least  five  years  score  0.26 
better than people who have never practiced yoga [19]. 

Participants completed this questionnaire in both pre-study 
and post-study surveys, and we compared change in scores. 
Four participants did not complete this questionnaire (one in 
each condition). We report on the remaining 57 participants. 

Across all participants, awareness and external scores were 
highly correlated (r=0.49, p<0.001). We combine them into 
a single score, and report the change in combined score and 
change in distraction score from before and after the study. 

FIELD STUDY RESULTS 
We present our field deployment results in terms of overall 
Food4Thought usage and our three research questions. 

Overall Application Usage 
Over the three-week study, participants took 951 pictures of 
food,  551 of  which  they identified as completing the daily 
crumb (some completed the crumb multiple times per day). 
Participants  recorded  an  average  of  15.6  meals  (min  1, 
max 92, average 0.7 per day), 9 of which completed crumbs. 
Each  crumb  was  completed  by  at  least  four  participants. 
Additionally, a server issue for three days potentially resulted 
in a small loss of data (we estimate approximately 20 entries 
lost in total, based on participant self-reported estimates).  

72% of participants reported they enjoyed receiving crumbs 
and  46%  wanted  to  continue.  S−N−9  checked  each  day’s 
challenge  before  she  went  to  bed:  “often  times  I  would  be 
pretty excited about the next day’s challenge and so I would 
look at midnight to see tomorrow’s challenge.” S+N−5 even 
described  “gaming  the  app”  by  changing  her  phone  time 
and date to look ahead at the next few challenges. 

Engagement and Mindfulness with Crumbs 
Figure  2  shows  usage  across  study  conditions  over  time. 
Negative binomial regression analysis with participants as a 
random effect (Table 3) showed a decrease in the number of 
challenges completed over time (Table 3 Days in Study, 95% 
CI:  0.8-0.9  fewer  people  complete  a  challenge  per  day 
across  the  study).  Use  of  a  system  often  decreases  as  its 
novelty wears off, and the effects of reminders also wear off 
over  time  [9,21,38].  Participants  also  described  being  more 
engaged at different times in the study: “I think towards the 
end I got a little bit lazier” (S−N−9), “Towards the middle, I 
would get a little bit forgetful” (S+N−13), “at the end I got 
more  into  the  rhythm  of  it”  (S+N+11).  Reasons  for  less 
engagement included: “a little bit forgetful” (S+N−13), “other 
things  going  on  that  just  had  my  attention”  (S+N+11), 
“vacation” (S+N−5), and “a new job” (S−N−9). 

During  post-study  interviews,  participants  also  remarked 
that Food4Thought increased mindfulness. S+N+17 said “As 
it is, I've been trying to eat healthier, but it's definitely made 
me  more  aware”  and  that  the  crumb  was  on  her  mind 
throughout the day “I always had it on my mind throughout 
the day, so I definitely think it helped.” 37 (61%) participants 
agreed or strongly agreed challenges made them think about 
food choices for the day. Overall, nutrition and non-nutrition 
crumbs both prompted participants to think about their food 
choices for the day, supporting our hypotheses for RQ1.  

Changing Food Choices 
In  both  the  pre-study  and  post-study  surveys,  we  asked 
participants  to  estimate  how  many  servings  of  fruits  and 
vegetables  and  how  many  servings  of  high-fat  foods 

Food as Method and Inquiry#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5637journal  of  other  food.  We  define  ‘journaling  behavior’  as 
logging  food  that  does  not  complete  a  crumb.  Although 
participants  in  social  conditions  completed  more  crumbs 
than  participants  in  non-social  conditions,  participants  in 
non-social  conditions  created  slightly  more  journal  entries 
(Table  4b  Social,  95%  CI  0.05  to  0.11  more  foods  during 
the  study).  We  believe  participants  in  social  conditions 
viewed  participation  in  social  challenges  as  the  primary 
purpose of the app, while some participants in the non-social 
conditions  saw  Food4Thought  as  a  food 
journaling 
application  with  the  challenges  as  supplemental  feature 
(e.g., S−N+8 described them as “a nice added bonus”). 

Differences between Nutrition and Non-Nutrition Crumbs 
We used negative binomial regression analysis to characterize 
correlations between application usage and study condition. 
Results are summarized in Table 4, with interaction effects 
summarized in Figure 3. Table 5 summarizes the difference 
between food mindfulness scores pre-study and post-study. 

Engagement (RQ2a) 
Participants who received nutrition crumbs completed more 
challenges  than  those  who  received  non-nutrition  crumbs 
(Table 4a Nutrition, 95% CI 1.2-2.3 more crumbs out of 21 
during the study). Participants in nutrition crumb conditions 
said challenges often encouraged improvements they already 
wanted to make, so they were more motivated to complete 
them:  “‘something  low  in  sugar’.  That,  in  particular,  just 
aligns with my personal dietary beliefs” (S−N+3). People in 
non-nutrition conditions often felt crumbs were arbitrary or 
did  not  have  a  benefit,  which  made  them  less  inclined  to 
complete  them:  “the  arbitrariness  of  the  challenges,  like 
eating a food that begins with the letter ‘S’ … It didn't seem 
like they had a point” (S+N−5); “I didn't understand what I 
was  getting  out  of  doing  the  challenge”  (S−N−1).  This  is 
counter to our expectation non-nutrition crumbs would lead 
to higher engagement, though the next section notes social 
features interacted with crumb type: participants were more 
engaged with non-nutrition crumbs in the social condition. 

Mindfulness (RQ2b) 
We  observed  a  negative  effect  of  nutrition-focused  crumbs 
on  the  combined  awareness  and  external  scores  (Table  5a 
Nutrition,  95% CI:  0.26-1.85  decrease).  Given  the  overall 
increase  in  mindfulness  reported  in  the  previous  section 
(Table  5a  Intercept,  95%  CI:  0.25-1.35  increase),  this 
means that although participation in the study contributed to 
awareness,  it  had  less  of  an  effect  in  the  nutrition 
conditions.  This  is  consistent  with  our  hypothesis  that  the 
corrective nature of nutritionally prescriptive challenges can 
interfere with the non-judgmental nature of mindfulness. 

Opportunities for Learning 
Participants  in  nutrition  and  non-nutrition  conditions  said 
they  looked  up  foods:  “For  almost  all  of  the  letter  ones,  I 
Googled lists of foods that start with ‘A’, lists of foods that 
start with ‘Q’” (S+N−5), “I Googled, saw what was high in 
Vitamin C” (S−N+9). Crumbs that involved looking up foods 
were the favorite for participants in the nutrition condition, 

Figure 2. Certain challenges, particularly in the social 
conditions, resulted in greater completion. 

   Count Model Coefficients 
Variable   Estimate  Std. Error  p 

(Intercept)    
Social   
Nutrition   
Social*Nutrition   
Weekend   
Days in Study   
Social*Days in Study   
Nutrition*Days in Study   

0.472 
0.028 
0.122 
-0.837 
-0.321 
-0.161 
0.102 
-0.005 

0.584  
0.371  
0.204  
0.153  
0.035 * 

0.397 
0.468 
0.517 
0.586 
0.152 
0.026  <0.001 *** 
0.026  <0.001 *** 
0.023 

0.821  

*** p<0.001     ** p<0.01     * p< 0.05     . p< 0.1 

Table 3. Challenge completion rate decreased over the study. 
The effect was mitigated in the social conditions. 
(e.g., red  meat)  they  consumed  over  the  past  seven  days. 
Participants  across  all  conditions  reported  increasing  their 
fruit and vegetable consumption since using the application 
(t55=1.74,  p<0.05)  but  leaving  their  high-fat  consumption 
unchanged  (t55=-0.68,  p≈0.75).  While  we cannot distinguish 
whether participants changed eating behaviors as a result of 
the  application  or  overall  study  participation,  this  is  a 
promising indicator that crumbs may lead to behavior change.  

In  the  surveys  and  interviews,  many  participants  said  they 
changed what they ate to complete a challenge: “There was 
one day, eat something that has an A and I ate applesauce 
for  breakfast  instead  of  some  other  fruit.  The  same  thing 
with  ‘eat  something  sour’.  I  ate  yogurt  for  breakfast,  for 
that reason” (S+N−9) and “one of the ones that was high in 
Omega  3,  so  I  decided  to  have  fish  for  dinner  instead  of 
whatever I was going to ordinarily have” (S−N+9). 

In  some  cases,  participants  changed  what  they  ate  for  the 
better: “I know oranges are very hard to peel, they're kind 
of  annoying,  they  make  your  hands  dirty,  but  I  know  I 
probably should be eating them, so that one I ate” (S−N+5). 
However,  some  changes  were  for  the  worse:  “there  were 
days  like,  ‘Eat  something  from  a  package.’  That  was 
actually the first day of my vacation… we had just filled our 
kitchen with amazing beautiful fruits and vegetables, and I 
would not have eaten anything from a package that day, at 
all, if I hadn't had that challenge” (S+N−5). 

Additional Journaling 
Although we designed Food4Thought for daily completion of 
crumbs,  people  could  also  use  it  to  keep  a  photo-based 

Food as Method and Inquiry#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5638 
 (a) Challenges Completed 

  Count Model Coefficients 

Variable   Estimate  Std. Error  p 

1.645     
0.662 
0.495 
-0.539     

(Intercept)    
Social   
Nutrition   
Social*Nutrition   
(b) Journal Pictures 
(Intercept)    
Social   
Nutrition   
Social*Nutrition   

3.005 
-2.599 
-0.528 
0.005 

0.133  <0.001 *** 
0.149  <0.001 *** 
0.171 
 0.004 ** 
0.199  0.007 ** 

0.067  <0.001 *** 
0.187  <0.001 *** 
0.113  <0.001 *** 
0.314  0.735  

*** p<0.001     ** p<0.01     * p< 0.05     . p< 0.1 

Table  4.  Regression  results  for  (a)  Number  of  challenges 
completed and (b) Number of pictures taken in support of a 
food journal, varied by level of social and nutrition variables. 
The intercept indicates a baseline level, while other variables 
denote the influence of the study conditions. Social*Nutrition 
denotes the influence of both conditions (S+N+) compared to 
when one condition was absent (S+N−), (S−N+). 

(a) 

(b) 

Figure 3. Observed interaction effects between conditions  
for (a) challenges completed and (b) journaling behavior. 
Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. 

as they found them more fun: “the ones that required me to 
look  something  up  were  more  fun”  (S+N+13).  A  few 
participants also said they enjoyed when crumbs made them 
learn  about  nutritional  factors  they  did  not  otherwise 
consider: “My favorite ones were… the Vitamin D ones and 
the 'eat something low on the glycemic index,' I guess those 
are two things I didn't know much about” (S+N+17). 

Participants  also  liked  learning  about  new  foods  and  their 
health  benefits:  “I  liked  the  ‘eat  something  good  for  your 
liver’  challenge  because  I had  to  look  up  things  that  were 
good  for  my  liver,  so  I  learned  something  new”  (S+N+3). 
Even  when  not  looking  up  food,  participants  reported 
looking  more  closely  at  their  food  and  its  health  benefits, 
such as S+N+8: “it made me more conscious of what I was 
eating … make me more aware of, ‘Hey, what's the health 
benefit of my Greek yogurt.’”  

Role and Effects of Social Features  
The  social  intervention  amplified  engagement,  especially 
for  non-nutrition  crumbs.  Participants 
the  social 
condition also described learning from other participants. 

in 

 (a) Awareness & External 

  Linear Model Coefficients 

Variable   Estimate  Std. Error  p 

(Intercept)    
Social   
Nutrition   
Social*Nutrition   

(b) Distraction 

(Intercept)    
Social   
Nutrition   
Social*Nutrition   

0.796 
-0.662 
-1.055 
0.920 

-0.334 
0.451 
0.481 
-0.753 

0.274  0.005 **- 
0.336  0.054 . 
0.398  0.011 * 
0.490  0.066 . 

0.184  0.076 . 
0.226  0.051 . 
0.268  0.078 . 
0.330  0.026 * 

*** p<0.001     ** p<0.01     * p< 0.05     . p< 0.1 

Table  5.  Across  Food4Thought,  we  find  (a)  improvements 
in food awareness, particularly in non-nutrition conditions, 
and (b) declines in identification of food distractions. 

in the social condition; Table 3 Social*Days in Study, 95% 
CI 1.05-1.17 more people complete a challenge per day in 
the  social  condition),  supporting  our  hypothesis  in  RQ3a 
that social features promote engagement. In interviews and 
surveys,  participants  in  the  social  condition  described  how 
the  social  experience 
their  motivation  and 
increased 
accountability:  “You just  don’t  want  to  be  the  person  that 
doesn’t  complete  any  challenges”  (S+N−13).  S+N−3  found 
posts by others to be motivational, “It was really interesting 
to  be  able  to  see  what  everyone  else  was  doing  and 
everyone was kind of really motivated about it… motivating 
me  to  [complete  challenges].”  Some  other  participants  in 
the  social  group  became  competitive  with  one  another, 
wanting to complete the crumb in a better or more creative 
way  than  others:  “I wanted  to  do  something  that  was  a 
better fit for the challenge than other people did” (S+N−9). 

Social  features  are  most  important  for  engagement  with 
non-nutrition crumbs. We observed an interaction between 
social  features  and  whether  crumbs  were  nutrition-focused 
(Figure 3, Table 4a Social*Nutrition, 95% CI 0.4 to 0.9 more 
non-nutrition  crumbs  in  the  social  condition,  in  addition  to 
the strong effect of the social condition itself). Participants 
in  the  social  condition  were  more  likely  to  complete 
non-nutrition  crumbs  than  participants  in  the  non-social 
condition. Social interaction may have given these otherwise 
“arbitrary” non-nutrition crumbs a purpose or meaning.  

Participants  in  the  social  conditions  also  commented  that 
notifications about posts by others reminded them to engage 
with the application. S+N−4 said “Sometimes throughout the 
day I would forget and then I would see some people post 
stuff  on  Facebook  I  would  say,  ‘Oh  yeah.  I  need  to  go  do 
that’.”  These  reminders,  as  well  as  the  accountability  and 
competitive aspects of the social group, likely supported the 
higher completion rate and lower drop-out over time. 

Engagement (RQ3a) 
Participants in the social conditions completed more crumbs 
than those in non-social conditions (Table 4a Social, 95% CI 
1.5 to 2.6 more out of 21 during the study). Participants in 
the  social  condition  maintained  their  interest  in  the  study 
longer (there is an interaction effect between days and being 

Experiences  with  sharing.  Participants  generally  desired 
more  social  interaction.  S+N−9  jokingly  recommended  we 
“make  people  post  more”  when  asked  for  potential  study 
changes. S+N+11 tried to engage socially, but was unhappy 
with her responses: “I put a little comment on [a post], the 
guy  replied  and  we  moved  on,  but  I  was  hoping  for 

Food as Method and Inquiry#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5639 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 

(b) 

Figure 4. People in social conditions used Food4Thought to 
(a) learn from others such as by asking for a recipe, or 
(b) demonstrate creativity in their food choices. 
conversation.” But most felt social interaction was supportive: 
“We’re  very  supportive  of  others,  people  were  asking  for 
recipes for things that they made and stuff. It was just nice. 
It’s  a  group  of  strangers  who  were  all  doing  the  same 
thing”  (S+N−6).  Participants  regularly  liked  posts,  and 
occasionally  asked  for  recipes  (Figure  4a).  Some  felt 
uncomfortable sharing pictures of their food with people who 
were  not  friends:  “I  felt  a  bit  awkward  initially  sharing 
what  I'm  eating”  (S+N−3).  However,  when  asked  if  they 
would have completed as many challenges without the group, 
most agreed with S+N−13: “I would have completed less.” 

Figure  4b  shows  a  discussion  between  participants  about 
the creativity of their responses to a challenge. Participants 
worried about being creative, and many often thought of the 
same  foods  to  complete  a  challenge.  For  “Eat  something 
that  starts  with  an  ‘A’”,  there  were  several  apple  posts, 
followed by a discussion of how nice it was to for someone 
to  complete  the  challenge  with  arugula.  Seeing  that  others 
shared  a  picture  of  the  same  food  they  had  planned 
discouraged some participants from completing a challenge: 
“if someone else thought of something before me then I felt 
like  I  couldn't  use  that  as  my  challenge  because  someone 
else  had  taken  it”  (S+N−4),  “if  a  bunch  of  people  had  put 
‘carrots’, I'm not going to put ‘carrots’” (S−N+9).  

Results support our hypothesis for RQ3a: a social experience 
made  crumbs  more  engaging  than  individually  completing 
them by offering motivation, accountability, and competition. 

Mindfulness (RQ3b) 
Participants  in  the  nutrition-social  condition  experienced  a 
decrease  in  identification  of  food  distractions  (Table  5b 
Social*Nutrition, 95% CI 0.09-1.41 decrease).  It is possible 
that  the  additional  social  reminders  were  sometimes  a 
distraction or that social engagement with crumbs took their 
attention away from the eating experience. 

Opportunities for Learning 
As  in  the  non-social  condition,  participants  in  the  social 
condition looked up foods that completed a crumb. Participants 
in the social condition further learned through discussion on 
their posts and by seeing others post in the Facebook group 
about  what  foods  completed  a  crumb:  “My  favorite  ones 

were…  the  Vitamin  D  ones  and  the  'eat  something  low  on 
the  glycemic  index,'  I  guess  those  are  two  things  I  didn't 
know  much  about”  (S+N+7).  Many  commented  their  diet 
was boring: “I'm pretty boring, I tend to eat the same thing 
for breakfast and lunch every day” (S+N+10). They used the 
Facebook group to learn about other foods: “it was nice to 
see  the  variety  of  how  some  people  completed  the 
challenges”  (S+N+8),  “I  was  looking  at  what  others  are 
doing and that gave me some ideas” (S+N−3). Others asked 
for  recipes  of  dishes  that  looked  good:  “I  got  a  couple 
recipes which I'm really excited about” (S+N−4). Participants 
in  the  social  conditions  preferred  crumbs  for  which  they 
wanted  to  see  the  responses  of  others,  such  as  creative  or 
tricky challenges: “The homemade challenge was memorable 
because  I  enjoyed  seeing  what  everyone  else  posted.” 
(S+N−20), “the squishy one, I couldn't think of anything and 
enjoyed seeing what others came up with” (S+N−2).  

DISCUSSION 
Table  6  summarizes  our  findings.  Our overall results  show 
the  potential  for  low-burden  and  non-corrective  eating 
interventions.  People  can  obtain  benefits  in  their  eating,  as 
demonstrated  by  the  increase  in  reported  food  mindfulness, 
learning about food, and changes in diet, with challenges that 
require eating and recording only one food per day. Not only 
are  non-nutritionally  prescriptive  challenges  effective,  they 
actually lead to greater gains in mindfulness than nutritionally 
prescriptive crumbs. The remainder of this section discusses 
challenges around engagement and re-engagement with these 
activities as well as future opportunities for crumbs. 

Designing for Engagement: Difficulty 
We sought to design crumbs to be specific and achievable, 
but  open-ended  enough  that  they  did  not  push  a  particular 
health  goal  and  could  be  achieved  in  a  variety  of  ways. 
Although  participants  engaged  with  crumbs,  they  still  had 
trouble  completing  crumbs  that  were  too  difficult  or 
required planning. When asked why they did not complete a 
crumb,  57%  of  participants  indicated  they  had  already 
decided what they would eat that day, and the challenge did 
not  fit  into  their  plan.  Participants  also  sometimes  had 
trouble identifying foods to complete a challenge (51%) or 
found  a  challenge  too  difficult  to  complete  (31%).  S+N−5 
said “there's like four foods that begin with the letter ‘Q.’” 

In designing the difficulty of a set of crumbs, it is important 
to  consider  that  crumbs  may  be  situationally  difficult. 
S+N+4 said: “I was really bad on weekends. I left my phone 
places and didn’t have it for long periods of time.” Participants 
completed fewer challenges on weekends (Table 3 Weekend, 
95%  CI  0.57-0.98  fewer  people),  but  it  may be possible to 
design challenges more suited to weekend lifestyles. Varying 
difficulty to match events in a person’s life might help keep 
a person engaged, and could support playful approaches to 
promoting mindfulness [21]. S+N−5 did not think the crumb 
itself determined the difficulty, but rather context in her life: 
“the hardness felt less to do with the challenge and more to 
do  with  my  life  in  that  day.”  Designs  could  consider  such 

Food as Method and Inquiry#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5640 
 
 
Questio

Measure 

Engagement 

RQ1 
(crumbs) 

Mindfulness 

Engagement 

Mindfulness 

Engagement 

Mindfulness 

RQ2 
(nutrition 
features) 

RQ3  
(social  
features) 

Findings 
Participants completed an average of 9 crumbs. 72% enjoyed 
receiving crumbs, 46% wanted to continue receiving them. 
Challenge completion decreased over time (95% CI: 0.8 to 
0.9 fewer people per day). 
Increase in combined awareness and external scores (95% CI: 
0.5 to 1.7), decrease in food distraction score (95% CI: 0.0 to 0.8). 
Participants completed more crumbs in nutrition conditions 
than non-nutrition (95% CI: 1.2 to 2.3). Nutrition crumbs 
better reflected people’s food beliefs and felt less arbitrary. 
Decrease in combined awareness and external score for 
participants in nutrition conditions (95% CI: 0.1 to 1.7). Non-
nutritionally prescriptive crumbs promoted more mindfulness. 
Participants completed more crumbs in social conditions than 
non-social (95% CI: 1.5 to 2.6). Social condition participants 
did not want to let others in their group down, and found 
social interaction supportive. 
No significant effects on the Mindful Eating Scale. 
Participants in social conditions reported Facebook 
notifications served as an extra reminder to participate. 

Table 6. Crumbs increased mindfulness and created opportunities 
for learning in an engaging and low-burden manner.  

factors as when a person plans meals, as advance notice of 
crumbs could inform grocery shopping. As another possible 
direction,  a  longer  period  could  be  provided  for  complete 
crumbs  (e.g., “Eat  something  spicy  this  week”).  S+N+10 
supported this, stating: “If I knew it sooner… I could plan to 
incorporate this into whatever I'm eating.” 

Designing for Engagement: Social 
Although non-nutrition crumbs promoted greater mindfulness, 
people were less engaged with them on their own. Based on 
reactions  from  study  participants,  we  believe  it  took  the 
social  feature  to  give  meaning  to  these  otherwise  arbitrary 
challenges. Future designers and researchers of mindfulness 
systems  and  other  non-judgmental  or  non-prescriptive 
wellness  activities  might  also  use  social  features  to  give 
them  meaning,  or  they  might  work  to  identify  other 
techniques to create engagement around these activities.  

Participants  also  noted  opportunities  for  social  features  to 
be developed further. S+N+11 recommended the researchers 
“cast  some questions out to the group to try and stimulate 
some  interaction  between  the  group  members”,  consistent 
with  recommendations  from  prior  work  [36].  Another 
approach is to group people with similar food goals, values, 
or  expertise  to  promote  a  shared  experience,  or  simply  to 
evaluate Food4Thought with a group of pre-existing friends. 

information  can  also  support 

Social 
re-engagement. 
Although  engagement  decreased  as  the  study  went  on,  we 
observed  significant  spikes  in  engagement  in  the  social 
conditions  (e.g.,  at  day  13  in  the  non-nutrition  condition: 
“Eat something that starts with the letter ‘Q’”, at day 19 of 
the nutrition condition: “Eat something that is vegan”), but 
no corresponding spikes in the non-social conditions. When 
social  participants  saw  an  influx  of  posts  completing  a 
challenge, they felt motivated to complete the challenge as 
well: “A lot of people were posting in [the Facebook group], 
so I wanted to post also” (S+N−9). Although this temporary 
engagement did not sustain to other days, it suggests social 
features paired with lightweight challenges have a potential 
to help re-engage people in self-tracking after a lapse.  

Future Opportunities for Crumbs 
To explore the design space, we designed and selected a broad 
range of crumbs for inclusion in our study. Future research 
on  crumbs  might  focus  on  understanding  what  aspects  of 
those crumbs contribute to engagement and mindfulness, in 
both individual and social use. For example, from our study 
it remains unclear how specific nutrition crumbs should be. 
“At least 20 grams of protein” is more prescriptive than “high 
in protein”, and may therefore feel more judgmental. 

to 

Future  crumbs,  or  sequences  of  crumbs,  could  be 
personalized 
individual  goals,  dietary  excesses,  or 
deficiencies  (e.g.,  a  vegetarian  might  request  crumbs  that 
exclude  meats  and  promote  a  need  for  other  proteins).  
A  preliminary  questionnaire  could  identify  a  person’s 
food-related goals and use them to customize a sequence of 
crumbs,  or  the  survey  could  assess  a  person’s  food 
knowledge  and  provide  challenges  intended  to  teach  them 
something  new  about  food.  S−N+8  recommended  that 
challenges “be tailored more to where I know I’m weak.” 

We also believe there is opportunity to design and evaluate 
sequences  of  crumbs  for  people  diagnosed  with  a  health 
condition  with  associated  food  requirements.  For  example, 
someone recently diagnosed with irritable bowel syndrome 
might  participate  in  crumbs  that  help  them  discover 
substitutes for foods that commonly trigger symptoms. We 
imagine  collaboration  with  nutrition  experts  and  clinicians 
when designing crumbs to support these targeted goals. 

CONCLUSION 
We  developed  Food4Thought  to  evaluate  the  notion  of  a 
crumb,  a  lightweight  food-related  daily  challenge  that 
people complete by taking a picture of and consuming one 
food  or  meal  that  meets  the  challenge’s  requirement.  We 
also  examined  how  nutritionally  prescriptive  versus 
non-nutritionally  prescriptive  crumbs  and  the  presence  of 
social  features  affect  engagement  and  mindful  eating.  We 
did not design crumbs to replace journaling of all foods for 
people  working  to  achieve  a  specific  nutrition  budget,  but 
did show that they can provide important benefits. Nutrition 
and  non-nutrition  crumbs,  whether  completed  individually 
or socially, increased mindfulness and created opportunities 
for 
learning.  Although  nutrition  crumbs  had  higher 
participation levels and prompted people to learn more about 
the nutritional content of food, non-nutrition crumbs resulted 
in  a  greater  increase  in  mindfulness.  Social  participation 
sustained engagement better than private participation, and 
social  features  supported  engagement  with  non-nutrition 
crumbs. Our findings show the potential of these lightweight, 
even  non-nutritionally  prescriptive  interventions,  and  we 
urge further design and study of such approaches. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  thank  Elena  Agapie,  Elizabeth  Bales,  Morgan  Dixon,  and 
Ravi Karkar. This work was funded in part by the Intel Science 
and  Technology  Center  for  Pervasive  Computing,  the  Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality (1R21HS023654), and the 
National Science Foundation (OAI-1028195 & SCH-1344613). 

Food as Method and Inquiry#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5641 
REFERENCES 
1.  Hugo J. E. M. Alberts, Sandra Mulkens, Maud Smeets, 

and Roy Thewissen. (2010). Coping with food 
cravings. Investigating the potential of a mindfulness-
based intervention. Appetite, 55(1), 160–163. 
http://doi.org/cfj8dz 

2.  Hugo J. E. M. Alberts, Roy Thewissen, and Loes Raes. 
(2012). Dealing with problematic eating behaviour. 
The effects of a mindfulness-based intervention on 
eating behaviour, food cravings, dichotomous thinking 
and body image concern. Appetite, 58(3), 847–851. 
http://doi.org/fxjm5k 

3.  Adrienne Andrew, Gaetano Borriello, and James 
Fogarty. (2013). Simplifying Mobile Phone Food 
Diaries: Design and Evaluation of a Food Index-Based 
Nutrition Diary. Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for 
Healthcare (PervasiveHealth ’13), 260–263. 
http://doi.org/bbkk 

4.  Bruce Arnow, Justin Kenardy, and W. Stewart Agras. 

(1995). The Emotional Eating Scale: The Development 
of a Measure to Assess Coping with Negative Affect 
by Eating. The International Journal of Eating 
disorders, 18(1), 79–90.  
http://doi.org/fs28bx 

5.  Ruth A. Baer, Sarah Fischer, and Debra B. Huss. 

(2005). Mindfulness and Acceptance in the Treatment 
of Disordered Eating. Journal of Rational-Emotive & 
Cognitive-Behavior Therapy, 23(4), 281–300. 
http://doi.org/dkc49g 

6.  Eric P. S. Baumer, Sherri Jean Katz, Jill E. Freeman, 
Phil Adams, Amy L. Gonzales, JP Pollak, Daniela 
Retelny, Jeff Niederdeppe, Christine M. Olson, and 
Geri K. Gay. (2012). Prescriptive Persuasion and 
Open-Ended Social Awareness: Expanding the Design 
Space of Mobile Health. Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW ’12), 475–484. 
http://doi.org/bbkm 

7.  Eric P. S. Baumer, Vera Khovanskaya, Phil Adams, 

John P. Pollak, Stephen Voida, and Geri Gay. (2013). 
Designing for Engaging Experiences in Mobile Social-
Health Support Systems. IEEE Pervasive Computing, 
12(3), 32–39.  
http://doi.org/bbkn 

8. 

Jeannette M. Beasley, William T. Riley, Amanda 
Davis, and Jatinder Singh. (2008). Evaluation of a 
PDA-based dietary assessment and intervention 
program: a randomized controlled trial. Journal of the 
American College of Nutrition, 27(2), 280–286.  
http://doi.org/bbkp 

9.  Frank Bentley and Konrad Tollmar. (2013). The Power 
of Mobile Notifications to Increase Wellbeing Logging 
Behavior. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’13), 
1095–1098.  
http://doi.org/f2zs59 

10.  Sahara Byrne, Geri Gay, J. P. Pollack, Amy Gonzales, 

Daniela Retelny, Theodore Lee, and Brian Wansink. 
(2012). Caring for Mobile Phone-Based Virtual Pets 
can Influence Youth Eating Behaviors. Journal of 
Children and Media, 6(1), 83–99. 
http://doi.org/dskw69 

11.  Nathan K. Cobb and Josée Poirier. (2014). Effectiveness 
of a Multimodal Online Well-Being Intervention: A 
Randomized Controlled Trial. American Journal of 
Preventive Medicine, 46(1), 41–48. 
http://doi.org/bbkq 

12.  Sunny Consolvo, Katherine Everitt, Ian Smith, and 
James A. Landay. (2006). Design Requirements for 
Technologies that Encourage Physical Activity. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’06), 457–466. 
http://doi.org/b2wmz3 

13.  Sunny Consolvo, Predrag Klasnja, David W. 

McDonald, and James A. Landay. (2009). Goal-setting 
Considerations for Persuasive Technologies that 
Encourage Physical Activity. Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Persuasive Technology 
(Persuasive ’09). 
http://doi.org/cddnsz 

14.  Felicia Cordeiro, Elizabeth Bales, Erin Cherry, and 
James Fogarty. (2015). Rethinking the Mobile Food 
Journal: Exploring Opportunities for Lightweight 
Photo-Based Capture. Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’15), 3207–3216. 
http://doi.org/bbkc 

15.  Felicia Cordeiro, Daniel A. Epstein, Edison Thomaz, 
Elizabeth Bales, Arvind K. Jagannathan, Gregory D. 
Abowd, and James Fogarty. (2015). Barriers and 
Negative Nudges: Exploring Challenges in Food 
Journaling. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15), 
1159–1162. 
http://doi.org/bbdt 

16.  Franco Curmi, Maria Angela Ferrario, Jen Southern, 
and Jon Whittle. (2013). HeartLink : Open Broadcast 
of Live Biometric Data to Social Networks. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’13), 1749–1758. 
http://doi.org/bbkr 

Food as Method and Inquiry#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA564217.  Daniel A. Epstein, Bradley H. Jacobson, Elizabeth 
Bales, David W. McDonald, and Sean A. Munson. 
(2015). From “nobody cares” to “way to go!”: A 
Design Framework for Social Sharing in Personal 
Informatics. Proceedings of the ACM Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW ’15). 
http://doi.org/bbks 

18.  BJ Fogg. (2009). Creating Persuasive Technologies: 

An Eight-Step Design Process. Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Persuasive Technology 
(Persuasive ’09). 
http://doi.org/b4vd4k 

19.  Celia Framson, Alan R. Kristal, Jeanette M. Schenk, 

Alyson J. Littman, Steve Zeliadt, and Denise Benitez. 
(2009). Development and validation of the Mindful 
Eating Questionnaire. Journal of the American Dietetic 
Association, 109, 1439–1444. 
http://doi.org/fjzb7h 

20.  Jim Gormally, Sionag Black, Sandy Daston, and David 
Rardin. (1982). The Assessment of Binge Eating 
Severity among Obese Persons. Addictive Behaviors, 
7(1), 47–55. 
http://doi.org/b29mxz 

26.  Edwin A. Locke and Gary P. Latham. (2002). Building 
a practically userful theory of goal setting and task 
motivation: a 35-year odyssey. American Pyschologist, 
57(9), 705–717. 
http://doi.org/d4d932 

27.  Jennifer Mankoff, Gary Hsieh, Ho Chak Hung, Sharon 
Lee, and Elizabeth Nitao. (2002). Using Low-Cost 
Sensing to Support Nutritional Awareness. 
Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’02), 1–8. 
http://doi.org/cf5gf2 

28.  Jean W. Marr. (1971). Individual dietary surveys: 

purposes and methods. World Review of Nutrition and 
Dietetics, 13, 105 – 64. 
http://doi.org/bbkv 

29.  Elina Mattila, Juha Pärkkä, Marion Hermersdorf, Jussi 

Kaasinen, Janne Vainio, Kai Samposalo, Juho Merilahti, 
Juha Kolari, Minna Kulju, Raimo Lappalainen, and 
Ilkka Korhonen. (2008). Mobile diary for wellness 
management-results on usage and usability in two user 
studies. IEEE Transactions on Information Technology 
in Biomedicine, 12(4), 501–512. 
http://doi.org/fpfv5s 

21.  Rúben Gouveia, Evangelos Karapanos, and Marc 

30.  Sean A. Munson and Sunny Consolvo. (2012). 

Hassenzahl. (2015). How Do We Engage With Activity 
Trackers ? A Longitudinal Study of Habito. 
Proceedings of the ACM International Joint 
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing 
(UbiComp ’15), 1305–1316. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804290 

Exploring Goal-Setting, Rewards, Self-Monitoring, and 
Sharing to Motivate Physical Activity. Proceedings of 
the International Conference on Pervasive Computing 
Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth ’12), 
25–32. 
http://doi.org/bbn8 

22.  Andrea Grimes and Richard Harper. (2008). 

31.  Sean A. Munson, Erin Krupka, Caroline Richardson, 

Celebratory Technology : New Directions for Food 
Research in HCI. Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’08), 467–476. 
http://doi.org/cvc429 

23.  Jon Kabat-Zinn. (1990). Full Catastrophe Living: 
Using the Wisdom of Your Body and Mind to Face 
Stress, Pain, and Illness. Dell Publishing, New York. 
http://doi.org/fb57wh 

24.  Jean Kristeller, Ruth Q. Wolever, and Virgil Sheets. 

(2014). Mindfulness-Based Eating Awareness Training 
(MB-EAT) for Binge Eating: A Randomized Clinical 
Trial. Mindfulness, 5, 282–297. 
http://doi.org/bbkt 

25.  James J. Lin, Lena Mamykina, Silvia Lindtner, 
Gregory Delajoux, and Henry B. Strub. (2006). 
Fish’n'Steps: Encouraging Physical Activity with an 
Interactive Computer Game. Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing 
(UbiComp 2006), 261–278. 
http://doi.org/crcvd9 

and Paul Resnick. (2015). Effects of Public 
Commitments and Accountability in a Technology-
Supported Physical Activity Intervention. Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’15), 1135–1144. 
http://doi.org/bbkw 

32.  Sean A. Munson, Debra Lauterbach, Mark W. 

Newman, and Paul Resnick. (2010). Happier Together: 
Integrating a Wellness Application into a Social 
Network Site. Persuasive Technology, 27–39. 
http://doi.org/fsm763 

33.  Kenton O’Hara, John Helmes, Abigail Sellen, Richard 
Harper, Martijn Bhömer, and Elise van den Hoven. 
(2012). Food for Talk: Phototalk in the Context of 
Sharing a Meal. Human-Computer Interaction, 27, 
124–150. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/07370024.2012.656069 

Food as Method and Inquiry#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA564339.  Albert J. Stunkard and Samuel Messick. (1985). The 

Three-Factor Eating Questionnaire to Measure Dietary 
Restraint, Disinhibition and Hunger. Journal of 
Psychosomatic Research, 29(1), 71–83. 
http://doi.org/bkthvb 

40.  Tammy Toscos, Anne Faber, Kay Connelly, and Adity 
Mutsuddi Upoma. (2008). Encouraging Physical 
Activity in Teens: Can Technology Help Reduce 
Barriers to Physical Activity in Adolescent Girls? 
Proceedings of the International Conference on 
Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare 
(PervasiveHealth ’08), 218–221. 
http://doi.org/cvmffx 

41.  Christopher C. Tsai, Gunny Lee, Fred Raab, Gregory J. 
Norman, Timothy Sohn, William G. Griswold, and 
Kevin Patrick. (2007). Usability and Feasibility of 
PmEB: A Mobile Phone Application for Monitoring 
Real Time Caloric Balance. Mobile Networks and 
Applications, 12, 173–184. 
http://doi.org/bg67bf 

42.  Brian Wansink. (2004). Environmental Factors That 

Increase the Food Intake and Consumption Volume of 
Unknowing Consumers. Annual Review of Nutrition, 
24, 455–79. 
http://doi.org/fp2pgr 

34.  G. A. O’Reilly, L. Cook, D. Spruijt-Metz, and D. S. 
Black. (2014). Mindfulness-based interventions for 
obesity-related eating behaviours: A literature review. 
Obesity Reviews, 15, 453–461. 
http://doi.org/bbkx 

35.  Josée Poirier and Nathan K. Cobb. (2012). Social 

influence as a driver of engagement in a web-based 
health intervention. Journal of Medical Internet 
research, 14(1), e36. 
http://doi.org/bbkz 

36.  Paul J. Resnick, Adrienne W. Janney, Lorraine R. Buis, 
and Caroline R. Richardson. (2010). Adding an Online 
Community to an Internet-Mediated Walking Program. 
Part 2: Strategies for Encouraging Community 
Participation. Journal of Medical Internet research, 
12(4), e72. 
http://doi.org/fxc3pg 

37.  Caroline R. Richardson, Lorraine R. Buis, Adrienne W. 
Janney, David E. Goodrich, Ananda Sen, Michael L. 
Hesse, Kathleen S. Mehari, Laurie A. Fortlage, Paul J. 
Resnick, Brian J. Zikmund-Fisher, Victor J. Stretcher, 
and John D. Piette. (2010). An Online Community 
Improves Adherence in an Internet-Mediated Walking 
Program. Part 1: Results of a Randomized Controlled 
Trial. Journal of Medical Internet research, 12(4). 
http://doi.org/bh5ngp 

38.  Jason J. Saleem, Emily S. Patterson, Laura Militello, 
Marta L. Render, Greg Orshansky, and Steven M. 
Asch. (2005). Exploring Barriers and Facilitators to the 
Use of Computerized Clinical Reminders. Journal of 
the American Medical Informatics Association, 12(4), 
438–447. 
http://doi.org/cr6q5g 

Food as Method and Inquiry#chi4good, CHI 2016, San Jose, CA, USA5644 
 
