DataSelfie: Empowering People to Design
Personalized Visuals to Represent Their Data

Nam Wook Kim
Harvard University
namwkim@seas.harvard.edu

Hyejin Im
Tufts University
hyejin.im@tufts.edu

Nathalie Henry Riche
Microsoft Research
Nathalie.Henry@microsoft.com

Alicia Wang
Troy High School
aliwang2001@gmail.com

Krzysztof Gajos
Harvard University
kgajos@seas.harvard.edu

Hanspeter Pfister
Harvard University
pfister@seas.harvard.edu

Figure 1: DataSelfie: A) The questionnaire editor for data collection. B) A visual mapping canvas in which a user can draw a
unique personalized visual for a selected option. C) An interactive legend aids the interpretation of the visual mappings. D)
Each questionnaire response generates a distinctive visual.

ABSTRACT
Many personal informatics systems allow people to collect
and manage personal data and reflect more deeply about
themselves. However, these tools rarely offer ways to cus-
tomize how the data is visualized. In this work, we inves-
tigate the question of how to enable people to determine
the representation of their data. We analyzed the Dear Data
project to gain insights into the design elements of personal
visualizations. We developed DataSelfie, a novel system that
allows individuals to gather personal data and design custom
visuals to represent the collected data. We conducted a user

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

study to evaluate the usability of the system as well as its
potential for individual and collaborative sensemaking of
the data.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Visualization systems
and tools.

KEYWORDS
Personal visualization, personal informatics, self-tracking,
data selfies, data portraits, visualization, visual vocabulary.

ACM Reference Format:
Nam Wook Kim, Hyejin Im, Nathalie Henry Riche, Alicia Wang,
Krzysztof Gajos, and Hanspeter Pfister. 2019. DataSelfie: Empower-
ing People to Design Personalized Visuals to Represent Their Data.
In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Proceed-
ings (CHI 2019), May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK. ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300309

CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5970-2/19/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300309

1 INTRODUCTION
Data can capture a snapshot of the world and allow us to
understand ourselves and our communities better. Giorgia
Lupi, a renowned visualization artist, recently advocated for

People in CHI 2019LegendDoyoonEmmaKaiLillyResponsesABCDCHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 79Page 1data humanism, a more personal approach to collecting, an-
alyzing and visualizing data [21]. In contrast to traditional
data systems that focus on rapid processing, automated anal-
ysis, and summary presentation of a large quantity of data,
data humanism puts more emphasis on perhaps slow but
deeper engagements with data, as well as unique expressive
visuals that embrace the context and subjectivity of the data
they represent.

Lupi’s manifesto echoes in a lot of existing research in
the areas of personal informatics, self-tracking, and casual
visualization [10], including an abundance of tools for col-
lecting and visualizing personal data [7]. However, most of
these tools focus on data collection, specifically automated
tracking, and use predefined presentations of the data. Users
remain mostly passive and less engaged with the data as
such. On the other hand, there has been a surge of construc-
tion tools allowing people to create custom visualizations
of data [13, 36]. Notwithstanding, these tools investigate au-
thoring processes and tool expressiveness and have not been
applied to a personal data context.

In this work, we are investigating the question of how
to equip people with the ability to design their own visual
vocabulary to represent qualitative and nuanced aspects of
personal data. As an initial step toward understanding the
empowerment through personal visualizations, we analyzed
the Dear Data project [23] in which Giorgia Lupi and Ste-
fanie Posavec collected, visualized, and shared the visual
postcards of their data on a weekly basis for about a year.
We performed open coding on the visual postcards as well
as their reflections on the process of making them. We de-
rived several design implications for personal informatics,
including values of qualitative data for deeper reflection of
self and common design elements used to personalize the
visuals of the data.

Informed by the analysis of the Dear Data project, we de-
veloped DataSelfie, a web-based interactive system designed
to enable any individuals to collect their data and decide
how to visualize the data. DataSelfie combines a familiar
survey authoring interface with a drawing capability so that
users can create any questionnaire to ask questions about
themselves and design a personalized visual vocabulary to
represent the collected data. Unlike existing personal infor-
matics tools, DataSelfie is offering users full autonomy over
the visual presentation of their data. It also makes it possible
to design the visual vocabulary at the time of creating the
questionnaire; the final visual output is determined later on
based on the response to the questionnaire. In this way, the
construction of visualizations is not an afterthought, but a
primary activity that users actively engage in while thinking
about the goals of their data collection.

Users can use DataSelfie in both individual and collabora-
tive scenarios. They can collect data on a recurring basis for

self-tracking purposes or share a questionnaire with others
to capture individual identities in a group setting. In the lat-
ter case, the small multiple of individual responses can create
a single collective visualization representing the group. The
users can also share their visual responses with each other,
facilitating communication among individuals through data
alone. Through a user study with 14 participants, we found
that DataSelfie provides an easy-to-use and enjoyable inter-
face to gather and visualize data. The variety of examples
they created also suggests that DataSelfie enables to create
expressive visualizations of data.

2 RELATED WORK
Personal Informatics & Self-Monitoring
Over the past decade, research has been abundant in personal
informatics [17, 18], also known as various similar terms such
as lifelogging and quantified self. A wide range of tools has
been proposed to assist with collecting and managing vari-
ous kinds of personal information, such as habits, activities,
and moods, to encourage self-reflection and to promote self-
knowledge and behavior change. Cho et al. characterize the
design space of personal informatics based on whether data
collection is fully automatic, semi-automatic, or fully man-
ual [5]. Manual approaches include analog methods using
pen and paper such as bullet journals [4] or digital meth-
ods using spreadsheets or note-taking apps. The manual
approaches have high data capture burdens, often hindering
people from sustaining long-term practices [5].

Automated tracking technology attempts to address this
issue by leveraging personal devices embedded with various
sensors to remove the need for manual data inputs [5]. How-
ever, complete automation of data collection often eliminates
additional opportunities for engagement and reflection with
personal data [5]. Also, sensors have limitations in the types
of data they can collect, mainly focusing on collecting quan-
titative information, and fails to support people’s practical
goals and emotional needs [1, 5]. Most semi-automated ap-
proaches seek to strike a balance between both ends of the
spectrum [5, 14]. For instance, SleepTight aims to make man-
ual tracking easier rather than automate it by leveraging lock
screen and home screen widgets [6], while OmniTrack pro-
vides manual trackers combined with triggers and external
services that enable automated logging [13].

Existing self-tracking tools focus on data collection and
management, not necessarily on how to display the data. As
a result, the design of the tools dictates the presentation of
the data, showing data summaries in the form of standard
charts or tables. In this work, we set out to explore how
to allow users to decide the representation of their data by
augmenting a familiar survey tool with a drawing capability.

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 79Page 2Casual and Personal Visualization
Most conventional visualization systems are designed to sup-
port domain experts to perform analytic tasks. As visualiza-
tion has become widespread among a general audience, we
are beginning to see more diverse uses of visualization. Pous-
man et al. describe casual information visualization that often
involves ambient and artistic representations of data [26].
This type of visualization targets a broader population rather
than experts alone and also serves personal or even aesthetic
purposes [34]. Like other traditional visualizations, it gener-
ates analytic, often implicit, insights but often focuses more
on awareness and reflective insights [26].

In the field of personal informatics, visualization has gained
growing popularity as it provides a means to quickly make
sense of complex data without requiring advanced statis-
tical literacy. Huang et al. provide an overview of various
design dimensions of personal visualizations and personal
visual analytics [10], including who the data is about (e.g.,
self, family, and community) and the degree of control over
data collection.

Visualizations in personal informatics tools are often per-
sonalized by using unconventional encodings such as visual
metaphors, pictograms, and abstract drawings. For instance,
UbiFit Garden uses the metaphor of a garden that blooms
based on the performance of a user’s physical activities [7].
Paper bullet journalists employ personally meaningful rep-
resentations to meet their practical and emotional needs in
tracking different types of data [1]. Such subjective visual-
izations can convey a unique perspective in personal visual-
izations [33], encourage further exploration of data [35], and
establish a better sense of identity [12], although perceptions
and preferences regarding designs of personal visualizations
may depend on individual personalities [30].

While the past research suggests potential benefits of hav-
ing personal visualizations of the data, users still do not have
full control over them in existing personal visualizations. In
our work, we provide a flexible framework that assists people
with designing and sharing expressive visual representations
of their data.

Visualization Authoring Tools
Significant efforts have been recently made to enable non-
experts to create data visualizations both in industry and
academia. Tableau [31] provides a simple drag & drop in-
terface for constructing a chart while automating visual en-
coding under the hood based on perceptual effectiveness.
Recent tools such as Lyra [29], Charticulator [27], and Data
Illustrator [19] provide more customization options, includ-
ing fine-grained mappings from data to geometric proper-
ties (e.g., fill, stroke, opacity), although visual marks mostly
remain standard shapes. Other tools such as Data-Driven

Figure 2: An example postcard with the theme distractions:
Giorgia Lupi (left) and Stefanie Posavec (right).

Guides [13] and DataInk [36] allow for more expressive con-
trols over the design of visual marks by offering the ability
to draw freeform sketches constrained by data.

While individuals can use these tools to create visualiza-
tions for their personal data, they have not been considered
in a personal context. That is, visualization construction is
considered as an afterthought not being part of data col-
lection. DataSelfie can allow for prescriptive, rather than
descriptive, visualization design tightly coupled with a data
collection plan, generating a final visual in real time based
on data input from a user.

3 ANALYZING DEAR DATA
To understand what types of data can capture personal lives
and what kinds of visuals can be used to represent the data,
we analyzed the Dear Data project [23] in which Lupi and
Posavec collected data about themselves and drew custom
visualizations with the data every week for a year.

Data
The project has a total of 104 postcards that spanned 52
weeks; each designer creates each half of them. The post-
cards contain hand-drawn visualizations of data about their
lives along with a visual legend explaining the visual en-
coding and context of the data (Figure 2). The project also
accompanies each designer’s weekly retrospective, reflect-
ing on the experience of creating and sharing the postcards,
which is available on the website 1.

Method
We used qualitative methods of open and axial coding to
analyze both postcards and retrospective texts. While visual
postcards revealed common design elements to represent
personal data, retrospective texts allowed us to gain insights
into the underlying rationale for the design choices.

Results on Visual Postcards
Figure 3 shows the overview of extracted categories and
observation counts out of 104 visualizations. Among three
major themes identified, things around me (52) and what i
1http://www.dear-data.com/by-week/

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 79Page 3Figure 3: A histogram of categories identified through the open coding of 104 visual postcards.

do (34)—external states— were more common than what’s in
mind” (18)—internal states. Regarding data scales, nominal
(103) and ordinal (32) were used most often in comparison to
numeric (30). In fact, numerical data was also often binned
into ordinal categories (8 out of 30).

Regarding the types of contextual questions addressed, we
found what (94, e.g., what I did? what for?) was the most
frequently used. how (67, e.g., how long or how intense was
it?), who/whom (56, e.g., who were involved?), when (56), and
where (36) were next in the order of frequency, while why
(20) was the least frequently observed. About half of the time
(54), they used visual annotations (e.g., circling or giving a
unique visual) to highlight specific items (e.g., husband or
boyfriend) and to communicate further context (e.g., missing
or uncertain data).

They regularly used standard layouts such as grid (50) and
list (22). For example, when showing data over time, it was
common to arrange items in chronological order or distribute
them in a 2-dimensional space in which both axes represent
time and day respectively. We also observed moderate uses
of other layouts such as facets (33), stacked (23), networks
(13), and trees (11). They also often used freeform layouts (24),
such as randomly distributing items in space. In most cases,
they used more than one layout in one postcard.

Most frequently used visual variables include color (97),
position (60), size (47), and shape (46). Size encoding was not
necessarily used for numerical data but also for categorical
data as well. They also often used texture (27), fill/no fill (12),
and orientation (17), which are not commonly observed in
digital visualizations. Most often used visual marks include
lines (74), glyph (67), and dots (56), while circles (32) and
rectangles (14) were also common. We also observed repeat
marks (16, multiple same elements are stacked to encode a
single value) and real objects (3, e.g., cosmetics).

There was also a notable difference between Lupi and
Posavec (Figure 3). For instance, Lupi used more numeric
scales compared to Posavec (26 vs. 4). As a result, Lupi
used more size encoding as well (34 vs. 13). Lupi’s visu-
als were fine-grained while Posavec’s visuals were vibrant
but straightforward. For instance, Lupi also frequently used

small visual attributes (e.g., dots: 46 vs. 10, and glyphs: 50 vs.
17) attached to a primary mark (see Figure 2).

Results on Retrospective Texts
We identified five different stages of the process. We summa-
rize what each stage entails below. We use ‘P’ for Posavec,
‘L’ for Lupi, and ‘W’ for both along with a week number to
indicate the source of evidence.
Preparation. Lupi and Posavec chose a theme in which
they are both interested. They often decided the theme for a
performative purpose as a way to promote certain behavior
(e.g., Being nicer - W23). They interpreted the theme in their
personal contexts, such as thinking about how they perceive
it or reflecting on the past experience they had. The choice
of the theme and the interpretation had an impact on what
kinds of data to collect and tools to use. They often set up
specific questions and categories for data tracking prior to
data collection, while in other cases they jot down logs about
the topic and sort through the logs afterwards.
Data collection. They mostly took qualitative methods for
gathering data, employing both analog and digital tools (e.g.,
notebooks, Reporter, Moves). The methods were largely di-
vided into two kinds: 1) surveying data at once and 2) track-
ing data over time. A side effect of this qualitative approach
was that they were aware of gathering data, which often
had an impact on their moods and behaviors throughout the
week (e.g., recording positive feelings creates an optimistic
mood - L31). This often made data collection performative,
intentionally manipulating certain data points.

Struggles in the manual process involved capturing tran-
sient things and noting down every instance of a data point
(e.g., having to pause and note a laugh in a circle of peo-
ple - P42). In particular, the latter resulted in what they call
data-gathering fatigue. They embraced this imperfect nature
of the manual process; for instance, data voids indicating a
special moment such as a wedding or being drunken. Simi-
larly, they marked with a special mark to denote playful data
manipulation by others (e.g., Physical contacts - W6).

While gathering data, they reflected on their characters,
habits, and preferences. For instance, they reflected on how

Frequency0265278104What I doThingsaround meWho/WhomShapeWherePositionWhenSizeWhatTextureRect, Triangle,CircleWhyColorLineHowOrientationRepeatDotGlyph91726522651112126252821193026119494523323914976112117379273334491410746501017121928472741348137129524317364917GiorgiaStefanieThemeDataContextVisual LayoutVisual Encoding ChannelsVisual MarksWhat’s in mindList, GridStackedRadialNetworkTreeFacetFreeformOrdinalNumericalTemporalNominalCHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 79Page 4they organize things (P16), where they have come from (P22),
and what makes them happy (L31).
Data processing. Once data is collected, they would orga-
nize the data to find interesting facts and stories that they
found meaningful and want to share. They often added ad-
ditional data to provide context (e.g., adding demographic
information to friends - L25) or simplified the complexity
of the data to ease the drawing or understanding of it (e.g.,
highlighting the top 5 emotions-P11). This stage also served
as a firewall to ensure privacy by hiding certain information
in the data (e.g., crossing out the husband’s name - P14),
which they enjoyed indicating it in the postcards. While ag-
gregating and categorizing data, they discovered new aspects
of themselves and had opportunities for self-reflection. The
final organization had an influence on mostly visual layouts
and groupings in postcards.
Visual encoding. They sketched and iterated on multiple
ideas before reaching the final drawing of the data. They
mostly used colored pencils, as well as pens & markers, but
often incorporated new materials and drawing techniques
(e.g., cut and collaged papers - W20 and lipsticks - L19). Most
frustrations in this stage came from the hand-drawing of the
data, including difficulties of redrawing mistakes, maintain-
ing accuracy, and mapping too many data points.

A variety of factors inspired the visual representation of
the data. These include: 1) visual metaphors for data or theme
(e.g., scribbles alluding the textured sonic waveforms - P32),
2) personal visual metaphors for data or theme (e.g., musical
scores for complaints - L07), 3) personal styles and prefer-
ences in general (e.g., plant-based shapes - P14 or abstract
arts - L14), and 4) random and spontaneous drawings rather
than dictated by data.

There was a tension between readability and aesthetics;
e.g., they were not pleased with the legibility of data insights
when they liked drawings, and vice versa. Often, aesthetic
focus was intentional, such as to detract attention from data
(P27) or to compensate for lack of patterns in the data (L14).
In general, they appreciated having control over aesthetics
by noting that both beauty and functionality are important
and which one to emphasize depends on data and context.
Sharing & reflection. By sharing visual postcards, they
learned about each other and improved self-knowledge via
comparisons. They appreciated different ways of interpreting
a theme (e.g., the definition of a nice act - W23), collecting
data (e.g., close vs broad range of friends - W25), and drawing
postcards (e.g., circular vs linear layouts - W06).

The postcards brought back vivid memories of each week,
providing ample rooms for reflection. They also reflected on
the impact of the Dear Data project on their lives, including
changes in future behavior (e.g., “After this week, I really

figured I could be nicer and credit people more often...” - L15)
and the value of the postcards as personal records.

Implications for Personal Informatics
Below, we summarize key insights we learned from the anal-
ysis results. Please note that the project involved two profes-
sional designers and thus the results may not generalize to a
general audience.
I1. Capture qualitative aspects of self. Our findings sug-
gest that qualitative data may enable more nuanced and
richer reflection that is not possible with current automated
tracking. A challenge is that the data is often ephemeral or
intrusive to gather.
I2. Reveal missing and uncertain data. We observed that
inaccurate and missing data is embraced in a personal con-
text. The mistakes and failures are part of the data and can
provide additional insights into their lives.
I3. Provide different modes of data collection. Data gath-
ering can be either tracking data over time or surveying it
once. In the former case, it may start with a specific collec-
tion plan or involve iteratively refining data or discovering
it during post-processing.
I4. Support data exploration for story harvesting. Visu-
alization for communication and sharing would require more
than listing all data points. Filtering & simplifying data and
classifying it into categories are ways to experiment with
different personal stories before the final visualization.
I5. Use visual annotations to encode moments. Annota-
tion and highlighting are useful tools for indicating specific
data and memorable moments in a personal visualization.
They can be also used to add humor or a personal touch to
the visualization.
I6. Enable designing personalized visuals. Designing a
unique visual of personal data may increase enjoyment and
attachment toward the data. It is also a means for self-expression,
communicating a perspective on the data and revealing one’s
personality through the visual.
I7. Choose visual variables for personalization.We found
that color and shape variables may be more versatile for cus-
tomization, while quantitative variables such as position and
size are mostly governed by data. Traditionally underused
variables (e.g., texture and orientation) due to lack of percep-
tual effectiveness might be acceptable in a personal context.
I8. Leverage visuals as personal documentaries. Our
findings also point to the forgotten value of visualization; i.e.,
records. While communication and analysis are the focus of
current visualization research, visual postcards demonstrate
the use of visualizations to record personal memories.

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 79Page 5I9. Address challenges with qualitative processes. We
observed that main struggles lie in data collection and visual
encoding stages. Our findings mostly confirmed previous
research [2, 17], including forgetting to gather data and re-
covering from mistakes. A notable difference is the difficulty
of tracking transient things like emotions or smiles.
I10. Support conversations through data. A significant
value of sharing is that it opens up opportunities to see
one’s data in the context of the other’s data. Comparing
and contrasting differences in data as well as in visuals can
provide additional channel for self-reflection. Also, others
might help to identify different data insights that are not
intended by the author.

4 DESIGN DECISIONS
Informed by the analysis of the Dear Data project, we wanted
to build a system for individuals to engage with their per-
sonal data via creating expressive visual representations.

Our design goal is provide structured support for novices
to crisply articulate the data they want to collect and vi-
sualize, as opposed to the Dear Data project that required
substantial expertise in data collection and visualization.

We also draw inspirations from the work by Lupi and the
Accurat team on automatically generating data portraits of
individuals based on their responses to a survey [20, 22]. We
aim to generalize this idea to a general audience along with
the insights learned from the Dear Data project.

D1. Using a questionnaire to collect qualitative data.
(I1, I3, I9) To enable flexible collection of personal data, we
seek to leverage the familiar experience of creating a ques-
tionnaire in a survey form. The questionnaire can serve as a
data collection plan as observed in the preparation stage. It
should be also editable to allow for revisions. The question-
naire is versatile to support contextual questions (e.g., who,
what, why etc) and can capture diverse aspects of daily lives.
D2. Designing a personalized visual vocabulary. (I6, I7,
I9) To allow people to craft unique and expressive visual
representation of their data, we propose to augment the
questionnaire editor with a drawing canvas in which a user
can draw visual mappings for collected data. The visual map-
pings create a personalized visual vocabulary and should be
also editable to allow for iterative design. The mappings can
be constructed after data collection or at the time of creating
the questionnaire; the latter has a benefit of visualizing the
goals of data collection in advance.
D3. Support sharing visuals of data: (I8, I10) To foster
collaborative reflection, we intend to support sharing data
visuals with others. To assist in interpreting visual mappings,
a legend should be generated and accompanied with the
visuals. Also, sharing with more than two people should be
possible.

5 THE DATASELFIE INTERFACE DESIGN
DataSelfie consists of three main components: a question-
naire editor (Figure 1A) and a canvas for drawing visual
mappings (Figure 1B), an interactive legend (Figure 1C), and
a response viewer (Figure 1D).

Creating a Questionnaire
The questionnaire editor has the same interface as other sur-
vey tools like Google Forms. It currently supports a multiple
choice question (radio buttons) with an option to allow more
than one answer (checkboxes). This type of question enables
collection of mostly qualitative data (I1), i.e., categorical data,
and also renders a rapid response by quickly selecting one.
Although we do not support numerical data, users can still
capture quantitative data by binning it into intervals (e.g.,
less than 10, 10 to 100, more than 100) as observed in the
Dear Data project. While out of scope for this paper, the ques-
tionnaire editor can be extended to incorporate automated
tracking similar to OmniTrack [14].
Collecting Data. To collect a data point, a user simply needs
to respond to the questionnaire, which is similar to filling
out a survey. The user can respond multiple times, gener-
ating more than one data point. To assist data collection
on a recurring basis (e.g., daily, weekly, or monthly), Data-
Selfie supports setting a reminder email to prompt for a new
response (I9). DataSelfie also allows the user to refine the
questionnaire during data collection (I3).

Drawing Visual Mappings
The questionnaire editor embeds a drawing canvas that af-
fords free-form sketching so that a user can draw personal-
ized visuals to represent each answer option per each ques-
tion (I6, I7-shape). To construct a mapping from a question
to a visual, the user can simply taps an option thumbnail and
draw a corresponding visual on the canvas, and keep doing
this for other options (Figure 1B).

In this way, the user can create a personalized visual vocab-
ulary integrated with the questionnaire. That is, the visual vo-
cabulary is a set of drawings tied to contextual questions for
data collection, generating a unique visual per each response
to the questions. DataSelfie allows iterative refinements of
the visual mappings at any time (I9).
Drawing Tools. The drawing canvas comes with a set of
tools including a pencil for sketching, selection tool, color fill,
and palette (color, stroke, opacity). The user can use the layer
view (Figure 4C) to see how the drawings for the currently
selected option would interact with those for other options
and questions. It is necessary since the same canvas area is
shared across the questionnaire, stacking all drawing layers
into a single layer to generate a final image when a user
submits a response.

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 79Page 6Figure 4: The drawing interface of DataSelfie: A) Drawing canvas, B) Auto-drawing, C) Layer view and selection, D) Emoji tool.

Figure 5: Automatic encoding support: A) Reusing a shape, B) Color encoding, C) Size encoding, D) Customization.

Assistive Drawing. To assist users with less experience in
drawing, especially with a mouse, we integrated an auto-
drawing feature [15] that suggests a predefined icon based
on a series of strokes, dragging & dropping images, and a
search box for adding emoji icons (Figure 4D). To enable
reusing of the same shape across all options, we also support
duplicating a shape across all options in a question, along
with automatic size and color encodings (I7-color, Figure 5).
The duplicate shapes compose a group constrained by the
applied encodings; i.e., if a user changes the size of a shared
shape, it also updates other shapes in the same group (I9).
Generating Visuals. Figure 6 shows a schematic diagram of
how DataSelfie generates each visual response. Once a user
submits a response to the questionnaire, it maps each answer
option to a corresponding drawing while other drawings for
other options are hidden in the final outcome. In this way,
the visual vocabulary can generate a combinatorial number
of visuals.

We currently take a layered approach to model the under-
lying visual vocabulary, which is similar to the layer model
in a conventional drawing tool like Adobe Illustrator. Back-
ground and question layers are merged into a single layer,
overlaid on top of each other in the order of questions. Each
question layer can toggle the visibility of one or more option
layers depending on the response.

Parametric Visualization Construction
Although simple, it is worth noting the way of generating a
visualization is prescriptive than descriptive. The user cre-
ate a visual vocabulary that can be used to generate a final
visualization without actual data, rather than attempting to
describe existing data. This is clearly different from typical

Figure 6: The production rule of a visualization in DataSelfie,
generating a unique visual for each questionnaire response.

visualization authoring tools as the users of those tools as-
sume the existence of the data. In our case, the generation
process is more close to parametric design. Each question can
be considered as a parameter whose value is later specified
by the user.

Sharing & collaboration with others
To facilitate a casual conversation through data, a user can
share the questionnaire with others (I10). Each of them can
then submit a response and receive a unique visual, con-
tributing to a collage of visual responses (Figure 1D) [20].
DataSelfie also supports sharing each visual response with
others using the hyperlink generated after submitting a re-
sponse (I8). To assist in interpreting the data selfies, Data-
Selfie automatically generates an interactive visual legend
from the visual vocabulary (Figure 1C).

Do you mean:BCDAPropagateABCDQ.1Q.1Q.1Q.1a.a.a.a.b.b.b.b.c.c.c.c.Color variationSize variationAPPLYPropagateColor variationSize variationAPPLYPropagateCreate a QuestionnaireSubmit a ResponseGet a ResultDraw Visuals for OptionsVisual MappingCHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 79Page 76 USAGE SCENARIO
We introduce individual and collaborative scenarios that
correspond to two kinds of data collection scenarios we ob-
served in the Dear Data project: tracking data over time and
surveying data once.

Scenario 1: Self-Tracking
This scenario introduces how an individual user might use
DataSelfie for self-tracking or lifelogging.

Sam is recently concerned that he eats pizza a lot. He
would like to have a healthy diet but struggles to do so due
to a busy school life, and decided to track what kinds of food
he eats every day. He starts by creating a questionnaire with
three simple questions asking what types of food he had
during the morning, afternoon, and evening (Figure 4).

Once finishing the questionnaire, he begins drawing to
visualize his personal goal of the questionnaire. He wants the
visuals to reflect his diet directly. He first draws a background
representing his body (Figure 4A). For each option, he draws
a visual representing the type of food he may or may not
want to eat. He thinks he is not good at drawing, so uses the
auto-drawing feature to draw the pizza (Figure 4B) and adds
an emoji to represent his feelings after the diet.

He set a daily reminder to fill out the questionnaire. When
he received a reminder through an email, he taps the link
using his mobile phone to go to the questionnaire to submit
a response. He often intentionally eats healthy food in or-
der to get the visual he wants, making the data collection
performative. At the end of the month, he reviews all the
responses in a collective form. He gets a sense of how he
maintained his goal by quickly gauging the prominence of
all the greens.

Scenario 2: Community Gathering
The second scenario demonstrates a collaborative activity,
similar to the one demonstrated by Giorgia Lupi in which she
used a questionnaire to survey fun facts about conference
attendees [22].

Emily is an organizer of a HCI workshop. She wants to
engage the attendees in a way that they get to know each
other as they belong to the same research community. She
thinks about the topic of the workshop and comes up with a
set of questions that may be well suited to represent members
of the group (Figure 1C). She draws a background that serves
as a template for all questions like a coloring book. The
drawings for each question fills a different region in the
background (See divide lines in Figure 1B).

Since this is not about tracking data over time, she turned
off reminders. Instead, she shares the web link to the survey
with the attendees. Each attendee gets a unique visual that
captures their identity based on their response (Figure 1).

Emily prints this visual and make a personalized badge for
each attendee. She also creates a collage of all responses
showing the community collectively (Figure 1D).

7 IMPLEMENTATION
DataSelfie is a web-based application written in Javascript.
It uses React.js [8] for building user interface components
and Redux.js [9] for application state management. We use
a Flask [28] web server and MongoDB [25] to persist the
user and questionnaire data and enable sharing through
hyperlinks. We heavily use Paper.js [16] to implement the
drawing canvas integrated into the questionnaire editor. For
assistive drawing, we leverage Autodraw [15] and Emoji
Mart [24]. DataSelfie will be open-sourced and available
online upon acceptance.

8 USER STUDY
We conducted a qualitative user study to evaluate the usabil-
ity of DataSelfie and gain insights into its usefulness with
an emphasis on lifelogging.

Participants
We had a screening survey to recruit 14 participants (nine
female and five male, six aged 18-24 and seven aged 26-
35, one aged 36-45) who have prior experience on manual
journaling and automatic self-tracking, as well as basic tool
literacy on survey tools and presentation software. We used
Safari browser on iPad 12.9 inch using Apple Pencil. We paid
participants with a $25 gift card for an hour-long session.

Procedure & Tasks
Each hour-long study session started with a background
survey at the beginning. We had a short tutorial and four
tasks in total. For the tutorial, we used an example adapted
from an existing template2.

In the first task, we asked participants to reproduce the
example from the tutorial in order to make them familiar with
DataSelfie. In the second task, they were asked to replicate a
new example as quickly as possible without any guidance
from a researcher. We varied the examples in the two tasks
so that users can see two use case scenarios: 1) surveying
a single state or current identity and 2) tracking recurring
states over time. In the third task, they needed to design a
new questionnaire with a minimum of three questions and
craft the corresponding visual vocabulary. We assigned each
participant to a specific scenario (A. tracking or B. surveying)
and topic (1. what’s in mind, 2. what I do, or 3. things around
me).

We concluded the session with a usability survey adapted
from the System Usability Scale [3] using a 5-point Likert

2https://ideas.ted.com/how-to-draw-your-own-selfie-using-your-personal-data/

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 79Page 8Figure 7: Four examples of questionnaires created by participants during the third task for two usage scenarios: A: tracking
recurring states over time and B: capturing a current state.

scale (1—strongly disagree, 5—strongly agree), and a semi-
structured interview discussing the overall experience and
potential benefits in their current practice.

The fourth task happened later online, moderated by a
researcher. We paired two participants who were assigned to
the same scenario and topic in the third task. They submitted
responses to each other’s surveys and shared the final re-
sponses. We asked them to reflect on how they perceive the
experience of sharing and exchanging the visual responses.

Results
All participants completed all the tasks. For the second task,
it took 4 minutes on average (min=3, max=6), while the third
task took 13 minutes on average (min=9, max=17). In the
usability survey, participants rated higher on the ease of use
( M=4.43, SD=0.76), the learnability ( M=4.36, SD=0.74), and
the usefulness of the tool ( M=4.29, SD=0.83).
Diversity of questionnaires and visuals. They generated
a variety of questionnaires (Figure 7, see the supplement
for the full collection). The question topics include exercise,
feelings, music, sleep, meeting, etc. A majority of questions
were how and what questions, while some questions did not
belong to 5W1H (e.g., Q: I like to take a shower. A: morning,
afternoon, or before bed). In terms of visuals, all participants
used color and shape variables while some also used the size
variable using repeat (or density) marks (Figure 7B1). They
also attempt to divide the canvas region to layout visual
elements based on questions (Figure 7A1).
Ease of use & learnability. Participants had positive expe-
riences with the tool with a few saying "the interface is very
intuitive" - P1 and "It is well-designed and fun to use" - P5. One

issue we found was foreseeing how layers will be merged, of-
ten ended up having next questions blocking previous ones.
However, one participant deliberately manipulated this by
having transparent elements to see through previous layers.
Participants liked the assistive drawing support. One partici-
pant kept using the auto-drawing and said "I know it is not
perfect, but I just like it" - P6, while another participant said
"I like having the emoji interface in a drawing tool" - P8. One
participant suggested to have drawing templates to further
alleviate the fear of a blank canvas.
Enjoyment & engagement. Participants made positive com-
ments on the engaging nature of the tool. For instance, they
mentioned that "I like how it integrates the answers into a
succinct and amusing visual form" - P5 and "It reminds me of
an art class. It would be useful for therapeutic purpose" - P7.
Other participants commented that "I enjoyed the roughness
of the hand-drawn sketches and I think the raw emotion feeling
would be lost if the graphics were very clean cut and digitized."
- P4, and "Freedom to draw anything to represent my data
makes it fun and lively" - P13.
Trade-offs in manual data collection. They liked the idea
of collecting qualitative data, saying "It’s a good way to gain
insights that can’t be traced automatically" - P11, and "when it
comes to qualitative data, it is more personal" - P13. These com-
ments are in line with the Dear Data project. However, a few
participants said they would not use it for self-tracking due
to lack of time for creating a questionnaire (e.g., "I wouldn’t
use this for self-tracking. It takes too much time" - P7).
Benefits of drawing personalized visuals. Participants’
reaction to the drawing capability was mostly positive, say-
ing "it allows you to visualize goals and impacts in advance"

Shoud you exercise today? (P14)P14P13A1Daily Thoughts (P3)P3A2P1How are you feeling right now? (P2)P2P4B1B1Things around me (P10)P10P12B2CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 79Page 9- P9, "I like visuals as they invoke more thoughts" - P7, and
"it would be good for emotion and well-being that lack clear
forms" - P8. Several participants also commented that "it’s
more interactive and personal than existing (automatic) track-
ing tools" - P13 and "I think I would use it to track my menstrual
cycles" - P10. Others had mixed opinions: "it’s good for qual-
itative data, but probably not for quantitative data in which
precision is important" - P8, "I would still like to see aggregate
summaries" - P12.
Benefits of sharing. They also made positive comments
on sharing (P3, P11, P12), although it is too short of time
to judge its true benefit. One participant mentioned that "if
there is one reason for me to use this tool, it would be the sharing
aspect" - P11; this participant expressed reluctance to use the
tool because of potential privacy issues. Other participants
commented that: "surprised since she had the same response
as me! I think the visual result helps to immediately tell how
similar or different our responses were" - P3 (Figure 7A2) and
"It was also very relatable to see how another (stranger) is
feeling about the same subject" - P4.
Other use cases. Several participants unexpectedly came
up with different use cases that we did not intend to support,
saying "I can design a visual to lead to make a decision. It can
make a real change on who you are in each date." - P14 (See
Figure 7A1). Other participants also mentioned, "I think I can
use this tool for testing different configurations for a garden I
am designing."- P1 and "My psychologist friend would love to
use this for her research tracking moods from subjects." - P2.

9 DISCUSSION
Limitations and Opportunities
The user study surfaced several opportunities for further im-
provements. We did not support question types for numerical
data, as it can be binned to categories. However, we observed
that participants were often annoyed as they need to write
out all the intervals manually (e.g., Figure 7B1). It may be
desirable to automatically generate these intervals while the
user provides the min, max, and step size of the data. The
main struggle, although not significant, was to come up with
questions in the third task, particularly regarding the first
topic: what’s in mind. This topic was the least frequent in the
Dear Data project as well. Providing questionnaire templates
or allowing them to share with others would alleviate the
struggle. Likewise, customizable drawing templates would
also mitigate the perception of efforts necessary, as well as
the concern about the lack of drawing skills.

Empowerment through Personalized Visuals
Our user study illuminated potential benefits of having con-
trol over the representation of personal data. One thing that

recurrently stands out was the joyfulness of creating person-
alized visuals. The randomness of the outcome also seemed
to contribute to it, as we saw some participants uttered their
surprise when they see a visual response. This observation
is also in line with previous research on the poetic use of
unconventional encodings to create an element of surprise
and stimulate reflection [33]. Another suggested benefit was
being able to visualize the goals of data collection, as well
as the impacts of the data on their lives. In particular, P14
articulated the use of our tool for visual decision making
that can have an immediate impact on behavior change. Our
study was qualitative and we believe it requires controlled
experiments or a live deployment study to investigate the
true potential of empowering people through personalized
visuals more formally. The findings from our study provide
initial hypotheses.

Beyond visuals and simple mappings
We focused on creating visuals in this work, but designing a
multi-sensory experience using personal data is an exciting
future direction. Similarly, one participant in the user study
mentioned that sounds could often be much more emotional
than visuals. It would be interesting to explore implications
of using sounds [37] as well as tangible materials [11, 32] in
a personal context.

In addition, we believe there is an interesting avenue for
exploring the concept of the parametric, decision-oriented
visualization generation. Our current framework for visual-
ization construction was based on simple linear mappings
from an option to a visual in a single canvas. But there are
fruitful opportunities to incorporate more advanced compo-
sition rules to the framework. For example, it can incorporate
branches like a decision tree and allow for laying out the
layers in multiple canvases that are further parameterized
by the position and size.

10 CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
In this work, we analyzed the Dear Data project to gain
insights on what is like to design custom visuals to represent
personal data. We developed DataSelfie as a step toward
empowering individuals to create personalized visuals to
depict their data. We conducted a user study to understand
the potential benefit of the empowerment. For future work,
we plan to conduct a long-term deployment study to study
its advantages and disadvantages in more depth for a self-
tracking scenario.

11 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Giorgia Lupi and anonymous re-
viewers for useful feedback. Nam Wook Kim would like to
acknowledge the support from the Kwanjeong Educational
Foundation and the Siebel Scholars Foundation.

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 79Page 10REFERENCES
[1] Amid Ayobi, Tobias Sonne, Paul Marshall, and Anna L. Cox. 2018.
Flexible and Mindful Self-Tracking: Design Implications from Paper
Bullet Journals. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
Article 28, 14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173602

[2] Alex Bigelow, Steven Drucker, Danyel Fisher, and Miriah Meyer. 2014.
Reflections on How Designers Design with Data. In Proceedings of the
2014 International Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces
(AVI ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 17–24. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2598153.2598175

[3] John Brooke et al. 1996. SUS-A quick and dirty usability scale. Usability

evaluation in industry 189, 194 (1996), 4–7.

[4] Ryder Carroll. 2018. Bullet Journal. https://bulletjournal.com/. Ac-

cessed: 2018-06-16.

[5] Eun Kyoung Choe, Saeed Abdullah, Mashfiqui Rabbi, Edison Thomaz,
Daniel A. Epstein, Felicia Cordeiro, Matthew Kay, Gregory D. Abowd,
Tanzeem Choudhury, James Fogarty, Bongshin Lee, Mark Matthews,
and Julie A. Kientz. 2017. Semi-Automated Tracking: A Balanced
Approach for Self-Monitoring Applications. IEEE Pervasive Computing
16, 1 (Jan. 2017), 74–84. https://doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2017.18
[6] Eun Kyoung Choe, Bongshin Lee, Matthew Kay, Wanda Pratt, and
Julie A. Kientz. 2015. SleepTight: Low-burden, Self-monitoring Tech-
nology for Capturing and Reflecting on Sleep Behaviors. In Proceedings
of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiq-
uitous Computing (UbiComp ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 121–132.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804266

[7] Sunny Consolvo, David W. McDonald, Tammy Toscos, Mike Y. Chen,
Jon Froehlich, Beverly Harrison, Predrag Klasnja, Anthony LaMarca,
Louis LeGrand, Ryan Libby, Ian Smith, and James A. Landay. 2008.
Activity Sensing in the Wild: A Field Trial of Ubifit Garden. In Pro-
ceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1797–1806.
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357335

[8] Facebook. 2018. React: A JavaScript Library for Building User Inter-

faces. https://reactjs.org/. [Online; accessed 16-Sep-2018].

[9] Facebook. 2018. Redux: a Predictable State Container for JavaScript

Apps. https://redux.js.org/. [Online; accessed 16-Sep-2018].

[10] Dandan Huang, Melanie Tory, Bon Adriel Aseniero, Lyn Bartram, Scott
Bateman, Sheelagh Carpendale, Anthony Tang, and Robert Woodbury.
2015. Personal Visualization and Personal Visual Analytics.
IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 21, 3 (March
2015), 420–433. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2014.2359887

[11] Yvonne Jansen, Pierre Dragicevic, Petra Isenberg, Jason Alexander,
Abhijit Karnik, Johan Kildal, Sriram Subramanian, and Kasper Horn-
bæk. 2015. Opportunities and Challenges for Data Physicalization. In
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3227–3236.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702180

[12] Jin Kang, Jomara Binda, Pratik Agarwal, Bruno Saconi, and Eun Ky-
oung Choe. 2017. Fostering User Engagement: Improving Sense of
Identity Through Cosmetic Customization in Wearable Trackers. In
Proceedings of the 11th EAI International Conference on Pervasive Com-
puting Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth ’17). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 11–20. https://doi.org/10.1145/3154862.3154878
[13] Nam Wook Kim, Eston Schweickart, Zhicheng Liu, Mira Dontcheva,
Wilmot Li, Jovan Popovic, and Hanspeter Pfister. 2017. Data-Driven
Guides: Supporting Expressive Design for Information Graphics. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 23, 1 (Jan. 2017),
491–500. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2016.2598620

[14] Young-Ho Kim, Jae Ho Jeon, Bongshin Lee, Eun Kyoung Choe, and
Jinwook Seo. 2017. OmniTrack: A Flexible Self-Tracking Approach
Leveraging Semi-Automated Tracking.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob.
Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 1, 3, Article 67 (Sept. 2017), 28 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3130930

[15] Google Creative Lab. 2018. AutoDraw. https://www.autodraw.com/.

[Online; accessed 16-Sep-2018].

[16] Jürg Lehni and Jonathan Puckey. 2018. Paper.js: The Swiss Army Knife
of Vector Graphics Scripting. http://paperjs.org/. [Online; accessed
16-Sep-2018].

[17] Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A Stage-based Model of
Personal Informatics Systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’10). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 557–566. https://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753409

[18] Ian Li, Anind K. Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2011. Understanding My
Data, Myself: Supporting Self-reflection with Ubicomp Technolo-
gies. In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Ubiqui-
tous Computing (UbiComp ’11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 405–414.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2030112.2030166

[19] Zhicheng Liu, John Thompson, Alan Wilson, Mira Dontcheva, James
Delorey, Sam Grigg, Bernard Kerr, and John Stasko. 2018. Data Illus-
trator: Augmenting Vector Design Tools with Lazy Data Binding for
Expressive Visualization Authoring. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, Article 123, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3173574.3173697

[20] Giorgia Lupi. 2017. Collaborative Data Wallpaper for STORY. http:

//giorgialupi.com/collaborative-data-wallpaper-for-story/.

[21] Giorgia Lupi. 2017.
be Visualized.
data-humanism-future-of-data-visualization/.

the Revolution will
http://www.printmag.com/information-design/

Data Humanism,

[22] Giorgia Lupi and Accurat. 2017. Data Portraits at TED 2017. https:

//www.accurat.it/works/ted/.

[23] Giorgia Lupi and Stefanie Posavec. 2016. Dear Data. Chronicle Books.
[24] Missive. 2018. Emoji Mart. https://missive.github.io/emoji-mart/.

[Online; accessed 16-Sep-2018].

[25] Inc. MongoDB. 2018. MongoDB. https://www.mongodb.com/. [Online;

accessed 16-Sep-2018].

[26] Zachary Pousman, John Stasko, and Michael Mateas. 2007. Casual
Information Visualization: Depictions of Data in Everyday Life. IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 13, 6 (Nov. 2007),
1145–1152. https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2007.70541

[27] Donghao Ren, Bongshin Lee, and Matthew Brehmer. 2018. Char-
ticulator: Interactive construction of bespoke chart layouts.
IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics (2018), 1–1.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2018.2865158

[28] Armin Ronacher. 2018. Flask: A Microframework for Python. http:

//flask.pocoo.org/. [Online; accessed 16-Sep-2018].

[29] Arvind Satyanarayan and Jeffrey Heer. 2014. Lyra: An Interactive Visu-
alization Design Environment. Computer Graphics Forum (Proceedings
of EuroVis) 33, 3 (2014), 351–360. http://doi.org/10.1111/cgf.12391.
[30] Hanna Schneider, Katrin Schauer, Clemens Stachl, and Andreas Butz.
2017. Your Data, Your Vis: Personalizing Personal Data Visualizations.
In IFIP Conference on Human-Computer Interaction. Springer, 374–392.
[31] Tableau Software. 2018. Tableau. https://www.tableau.com. Accessed:

2018-09-15.

[32] Alice Thudt, Uta Hinrichs, Samuel Huron, and Sheelagh Carpendale.
2018. Self-Reflection and Personal Physicalization Construction. In
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article 154, 13 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173728

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 79Page 11[33] Alice Thudt, Charles Perin, Wesley Willett, and Sheelagh Carpendale.
2017. Subjectivity in personal storytelling with visualization. Informa-
tion Design Journal 23, 1 (2017), 48–64. https://doi.org/10.175/idj.23.1.
07thu

[34] Fernanda B. Viégas and Martin Wattenberg. 2007. Artistic Data Vi-
sualization: Beyond Visual Analytics. In Proceedings of the 2Nd In-
ternational Conference on Online Communities and Social Comput-
ing (OCSC’07). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 182–191. http:
//dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1784297.1784319

[35] Shimin Wang, Yuzuru Tanahashi, Nick Leaf, and Kwan-Liu Ma. 2015.
Design and Effects of Personal Visualizations. IEEE Computer Graphics

and Applications 35, 4 (July 2015), 82–93. https://doi.org/10.1109/MCG.
2015.74

[36] Haijun Xia, Nathalie Henry Riche, Fanny Chevalier, Bruno Araujo,
and Daniel Wigdor. 2018. DataInk: Direct and creative data-oriented
drawing. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI). https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173797.

[37] Haixia Zhao, Catherine Plaisant, and Ben Shneiderman. 2005. "I Hear
the Pattern": Interactive Sonification of Geographical Data Patterns.
In CHI ’05 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI EA ’05). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1905–1908. https://doi.org/
10.1145/1056808.1057052

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 79Page 12