Designing a Wellness Self-Management Tool for Older 
Adults – Results from a Field Trial of YourWellness 
Julie Doyle, Lorcan Walsh, Antonella Sassu, Teresa McDonagh, 
CASALA, Dundalk Institute of Technology,  

Dublin Rd., Dundalk, Ireland 
{first.last@casala.ie} 

ABSTRACT
It is recognized that empowering individuals to manage their own 
health and wellbeing will result in more cost-effective healthcare 
systems,  improved  health  outcomes  and  will  encourage  healthy 
individuals to remain that way. With the advent of the quantified-
self  movement  in  recent  years,  there  has  been  an  increase  in 
technology  applications  supporting  wellness  self-management. 
Such  applications  allow  people  to  self-track  and  self-report,  with 
many providing feedback. However, little research in this area has 
examined  how  best  to  support  older  adults  in  health  self-
management.  This  paper  reports  findings  from  a  5-month  home 
deployment of YourWellness – an application that supports older 
adults  in  self-reporting  on  their  wellbeing  and  provides  feedback 
to  promote  positive  wellbeing  management.  Our  findings 
contribute to a greater understanding of older adults’ attitudes and 
behaviours  in  relation  to  wellbeing  self-management  that  can 
facilitate  the  creation  of  new,  personalized  health  and  wellbeing 
interventions for this population. 

Keywords
Older adults; wellness; self-management; feedback 

1. INTRODUCTION
Countries  globally  have  been  experiencing  an  unprecedented 
increase in the number of older adults. From 2006 to 2026, within 
the  65  and  over  age  group,  the  dependency  ratio1  is  expected  to 
increase  from  16.4%  to  25.1%  for  Ireland,  and  increase  from 
25.2%  to  36.6%  for  the  EU  25  [4].  In  the  US,  the  dependency 
ratio was 22% in 2010 and is estimated to climb to 35% in 2030 
[27]. Older adults are a diverse group and many enjoy long-term, 
good  health.  However,  to  varying  degrees,  national  health  and 
social care systems are preparing for potentially higher incidences 
of chronic disease, such as diabetes, arthritis and COPD (chronic 
obstructive  pulmonary  disease)  and 
resulting  dependency 
problems. For example, the incidence of diabetes is set to double 
between  2005  and  2030  to  an  estimated  number  of  366  million 
people living with diabetes in 2030 [29]. There is a cost element. 
Across  developed  countries  approximately  half  of  healthcare 
spending  is  attributed  to  older  adults.  In  the  UK,  hospital 

1 The old dependency ratio is the ratio of those over 65 over the working 

population (15-64 years old). 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
(cid:51)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:78)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:3)(cid:88)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:74)(cid:85)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:82)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:82)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:80)(cid:80)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:71)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:68)(cid:87)
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:69)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:81)(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:88)(cid:79)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:87)(cid:68)(cid:87)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:68)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:17)(cid:3)(cid:55)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:70)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:92)
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
(cid:82)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:90)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:83)(cid:88)(cid:69)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:75)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:82)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:71)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:87)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:87)(cid:82)(cid:3)(cid:79)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:86)(cid:15)
specific permission and/or a fee. 
(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:84)(cid:88)(cid:76)(cid:85)(cid:72)(cid:86)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:86)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:70)(cid:76)(cid:73)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:3)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:86)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:82)(cid:81)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:71)(cid:18)(cid:82)(cid:85)(cid:3)(cid:68)(cid:3)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:17)
Conference’10, Month 1–2, 2010, City, State, Country. 
(cid:51)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:43)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:48)(cid:68)(cid:92)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:21)(cid:22)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:50)(cid:79)(cid:71)(cid:72)(cid:81)(cid:69)(cid:88)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:15)(cid:3)(cid:42)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:80)(cid:68)(cid:81)(cid:92)
Copyright 2010 ACM 1-58113-000-0/00/0010 …$15.00. 
(cid:38)(cid:82)(cid:83)(cid:92)(cid:85)(cid:76)(cid:74)(cid:75)(cid:87)(cid:3)(cid:107)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:38)(cid:54)(cid:55)(cid:3)(cid:28)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:25)(cid:22)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:21)
(cid:39)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:23)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:27)(cid:18)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:23)(cid:28)(cid:24)(cid:19)
1 The old dependency ratio is the ratio of those over 65 over the working 

population (15-64 years old). 

(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:23)

readmission  has  risen  by  over  30%  due  to  lack  of  appropriate 
support  at  home  [26].  There  is  thus  a  paradigm  shift  towards 
moving from the current, reactive model of healthcare to one that 
is  more  proactive  and  preventative.   A  critical  challenge  thus 
exists in supporting older adults to manage their wellbeing within 
their home environment. 

This  shift  towards  preventative  health  care  has  resulted  in  a 
growing  interest  in  home-based  assisted  living  technologies, 
designed for and with older adults [6], [14]. These include a broad 
spectrum:  from  remote  health  monitoring,  electronic  sensors  and 
equipment such as fall detectors and bed alerts, to information and 
communication  technologies  (ICT)  and  environmental  control 
systems  (ECS).  There  has  been  a  surge  in  the  design  of 
technology-based  wellness  applications  that  support  people  in 
actively  monitoring  their  wellbeing,  largely  due  to  the  wide 
availability  of  smart  phones  embedded  with  powerful  sensors 
[15], [20]. Such applications promote wellbeing by providing the 
individual  with  some  level  of  feedback  based  on  collected  data. 
However,  there  are  issues  with  the  majority  of  the  technologies 
described above. Often they are not designed with older adults in 
mind,  and  critically,  any  data  collected  is  typically  sent  to  carers 
or clinicians rather than to the older adult themselves. Thus, little 
is  known  about  how  older  adults  might  self-manage  their  own 
wellbeing and what might motivate them to do so. 

This paper describes YourWellness, an iPad application designed 
to support older adults in self-reporting on their wellbeing and to 
provide feedback on such, in terms of showing an overview of an 
individual’s  wellbeing,  trends  of  their  data  over  time  and 
information  and  education  on  how  to  maintain  or  return  to  a 
healthy  state  of  being.  The  overall  aim  of  the  application  is  to 
provide a holistic approach to wellbeing self-management. While 
incidences  of  chronic  illness  are  high  in  older  adults,  and  while 
monitoring of physiological symptoms is important, what is often 
ignored are the associated health issues, such as effects on mood, 
social interactions, physical activity or sleep.  

to  gauge  opinions  on  whether 

In  this  paper,  we  present  findings  from  a  5-month  field  trial  of 
YourWellness  with  older  adults.  The  purpose  of  this  trial  was  to 
examine  long-term  adherence  to  self-reporting  in  an  older 
population, 
the  application 
increased  awareness  of  one’s  wellbeing,  whether  it  encouraged 
people  to  alter  their  behaviour  in  some  way  and  whether  people 
found  the  application,  particularly  the  feedback  provided,  useful 
and usable. For this particular trial, following from a focus group 
discussion  on  parameters  of  wellness  that  older  adults  find 
important  and  are  interested  in  managing  [8],  we  focused  on  3 
areas of wellbeing, mood, sleep and social interactions. However, 
the  application  and  its  management  system  as  described  in  the 
paper, support management of any area of wellbeing of interest to 
the  person.  Since  this  trial,  we  have  added  categories  of  falls 
prevention, nutrition, physical activity, blood pressure and weight 
management,  with  the  user  provided  with  a  ‘menu’  of  wellness 

 
parameters from which they can choose which categories they are 
interested in.  

We  found  that  older  adults  are  interested  in  self-managing  their 
wellness, they want to be more aware of their health and they are 
motivated  to  use  such  applications  provided  they  are  useful  to 
them.  Other  results  around  how  best  to  design  wellness  self-
management  applications  for  this  population  are  presented.  We 
consider  our  main  contribution  to  be  an  increased  understanding 
of  older  adults’  attitudes  and  behaviours  in  relation  to  wellbeing 
self-management  and  factors  that  affect  acceptance  and  adoption 
of such, that can facilitate the creation of new, personalized health 
and  wellbeing  interventions  for  this  population.  Specifically,  we 
found that older adults found line graphs to be intuitive and useful 
representations of their data and used these to dig down into their 
data and self-reflect; answering questions, in addition to receiving 
feedback,  increased  self-awareness;  however  ensuring  these 
questions are not too repetitive, combined with maintaining fresh 
and  engaging  educational  feedback/advice 
to 
encourage long-term adherence to wellness self-management. We 
also found that supporting the provision of context is important to 
allow people to make sense of anomalies in their data. 

is  necessary 

2.  Background and Related Work 
Recent  times  have  seen  the  advent  of  the  quantified-self 
movement,  whereby  individuals  have  begun  to  use  technology 
devices  to  ‘self-track’.  Self-tracking  typically  involves  recording 
some aspect of your life, including your work, sleep, exercise, diet 
or  mood  and  supports  self-management  of  such  through  the 
provision  of  feedback.  This  feedback  is  typically  persuasive  and 
aims  to  help  the  person  to  change  their  behaviour  to  live  the 
lifestyle  they  wish  to  lead  [10].  Some  of  these  ‘lifestyle’ 
management  applications  include  UbiFit  [3],  BeWell  [15]  and 
Fish  ‘n’  Steps  [19]  and  have  been  designed  for  general 
populations,  not  necessarily  older  adults.  Li  has  examined  how 
such  technologies  can  support  self-reflection  and  the  types  of 
questions  people  ask  themselves  while  reflecting  [18].  Such 
questions  involved  current  status,  history,  goals,  discrepancies, 
context  and  factors  (long-term  behavioural  factors).  Self-
management applications have also begun to appear in the health 
and  wellness  space.  Monarca  is  a  persuasive  monitoring  and 
feedback system for mental illness and is an excellent example of 
a closed feedback loop to patients [1, 20]. There are also a number 
of  noteworthy  commercial  applications,  including  Fitbit  and  the 
Nike+ Sportband.   

The  majority  of  health  management  applications  focus  on 
management  of  chronic  illnesses,  such  as  COPD,  chronic  heart 
failure,  diabetes  or  blood  pressure  management  [11,  21].  These 
support  self-tracking,  typically  with  wearable  sensors  such  as  a 
pulse  oximeter  or  blood  pressure  cuff.  They  provide  a  limited 
form  of  feedback  to  the  user  (e.g.  today’s  blood  pressure  value), 
but  the  goal  is  typically  to  provide  feedback  to  a  clinician  to 
support remote management of health.  

There  is  also  much  research  in  the  space  of  health  applications 
targeted  specifically  at  older  people  including  those  to  support 
functional  ability  [16]  physical  [7,  29],  social  [9]  or  cognitive 
wellbeing [12]. While some of these systems provide feedback to 
support  health  improvement,  their  long-term  usage  in  real 
environments  is  limited.  Furthermore,  they  tend  to  focus  on  one 
aspect  of  wellbeing,  rather  than  providing  a  holistic  approach  as 
outlined in [26]. Lee and Dey [16] describe a sensorised system to 
monitor pill taking and phone usage in older populations, the aim 
of  which  is  to  increase  participant  awareness  of  their  habits  and 

anomalies in their habits (such as forgetting to take a pill or mis-
dialing  phone  numbers).  The  authors  highlight  design 
recommendations  for  such  systems, 
including  highlighting 
anomalies and supporting the retrieval of context. However, their 
work  is  based  on  case  studies  from  just  two  participants  both  of 
whom  interacted  with  visualisations  of  their  recorded  data  only 
once. 

3.  The YourWellness Framework 
This section describes the YourWellness framework, consisting of 
an  end-user  mobile  application,  a  Web-based  management 
application and a cloud-based service supporting communication. 
The framework supports the collection of data, feeds results back 
to end users and delivers educational content and advice.  

integrated  and 

3.1  YourWellness Mobile Application 
For  the  purpose  of  this  trial,  participants  self-reported  on  their 
mood,  sleep  and  social  interactions.  Additional  categories  of 
the  application 
wellness  have  since  been 
framework is flexible, supporting the addition of any further areas 
of  wellbeing  that  may  be  important  to  a  particular  individual. 
YourWellness  has  been  fully  co-designed  with  older  adults.  We 
have conducted interviews, focus groups, workshops and usability 
testing  and  received  feedback  from  older  adults  on  attitudes 
towards  wellness  management,  preferred  methods  for  inputting 
information,  preferred  visualisations  of  feedback  and  the  type  of 
content  that  would  be  required  for  such  an  application.  We  also 
ran workshops with clinicians to ensure the application’s validity 
as  a  wellness  tool.  Details  on  our  design  process  are  described 
elsewhere [8]. Information gathered during this process was used 
to design the first prototype, as described below. 

Each  day,  users  of  YourWellness  answer  8-10  questions  about 
their  wellbeing  and  receive  real-time  feedback.  At  the  highest 
level,  a  feedback  ‘wheel’  provides  a  quick-glance  overview  of 
wellbeing (Fig. 1a). The wheel is divided into segments, based on 
the parameters of wellness that are being monitored and uses the 
traffic light metaphor as a high level indicator of wellbeing status. 
Thus,  the  interior  part  of  the  segment  is  coloured  green  if  the 
individual  is  self-reporting  that  they  are  feeling  well;  orange  if 
they are scoring relatively low; and red if they score very low. In 
collaboration  with  clinical  specialists  and  taking  into  account 
existing  guidelines  such  as  the  NHS  NICE  guidelines  [23],  we 
have  developed  a  scoring  algorithm  that  calculates  a  wellness 
score for determining whether a green, orange or red alert should 
be provided.  

Clicking  a  particular  segment  of  the  feedback  wheel  brings  the 
user  to  a  graph  of  their  self-report  data  to  date  (Fig.  1b). 
Educational/advice  content  is  also  provided  as  a  series  of 
messages  delivered  daily  (Fig.  1c).  These  messages  are  targeted 
towards the user’s current wellbeing state. For example, if a user 
is  scoring  in  the  orange  zone  for  sleep  they  will  get  a  message 
with  a  tip  informing  them  how  to  improve  their  sleep  hygiene. 
Such  content  has  been  defined  for  each  type  of  alert  in  each 
category  of  wellbeing  (i.e.  sleep,  mood  and  social), 
in 
collaboration  with  clinicians  and  by  examining  existing 
guidelines,  for  example  from  the  NHS2  and  the  Harvard  Sleep 
Centre3. Examples of such message are shown in Table 1. In the 
social  category,  we  suggest  local  classes  and  events  that  the 
person might be interested in. The overall aim of such feedback is 

2 http://guidance.nice.org.uk/PH16 
3 http://healthysleep.med.harvard.edu/ 

(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:24)

                                                                    
to  promote  awareness  of  wellbeing  and  support  improvement. 
While  the  goal  of  our  research  is  to  support  self-management  of 
wellbeing  in  an  older  population,  the  YourWellness  framework 
also supports sharing of data, thus it could potentially be used in 
various contexts, as explained in the next section. 

Table 1. Examples of Advice/Educational Messages 

Sleep

Sleep 

Sleep 

Mood 

Mood 

Mood 

Avoid  caffeine,  alcohol,  nicotine  and  other  chemicals  that 
interfere with sleep for 4-6 hours before bedtime 

It  may  help  to  limit  your  bedroom  activities  to  sleep.  Keeping 
computers,  TVs  and  work  materials  out  of  the  room  will 
strengthen  the  mental  association  between  your  bedroom  and 
sleep 

Light reading before bed is a good way to prepare yourself for 
sleep 

Dehydration  makes  a  person  tired  and  cranky.  Sense  of  thirst 
decreases with age, even for healthy older people. Therefore it 
is important to drink water before you feel thirsty 

Learning a new skill or achieving a goal, however minor, boosts 
self-esteem and motivation 

Research  has  shown  that  if  you  go  for  daily  10-minute  walks, 
overall energy levels and mood will be lifted within 3 weeks 

Social  You might be interested in a 6-week course of tai chi for older 
adults  that  is  beginning  next  week  in  your  local  community 
centre. The details are…. 

Social  Did you know that the local swimming pool offers free passes 

to senior citizens every Tuesday?  

3.2 YourWellness Management System 
Alongside  the  mobile  user  application,  a  web-based  application 
has  been  developed  to  support  its  management.  This  system  is 
cloud-based  and  provides  a  framework  for  easy  management  of 
the  application.  Key  features  include:  the  ability  to  add  question 
sets  related  to  any  area  of  wellbeing  and  push  these  to  the  user; 
the ability to define how each question is weighted to generate an 
overall  score  for  each  category;  the  ability  to  add  multimedia 
educational  content  (such  as  videos,  interactive  images  and 
articles) related to an area of wellbeing and push these to the user; 
the  ability  to  manage  the  frequency  of  question  delivery  to  the 
user;  the  ability  to  manage  and  sort  user  responses,  provide  an 
overview of their state of wellbeing, their adherence to answering 
questions etc.   

While  this  tool  has  initially  been  setup  to  support  the  research 
trial,  it  has  potential  to  be  used  by  clinicians  and  caregivers.  For 
example,  geriatric  consultants  who  we  have  consulted  have  said 

that they would use such an application in conjunction with tele-
health  equipment  as  part  of  early  discharge  from  hospital,  to 
monitor not only patients’ physiological vital signs, but also how 
they are feeling post-discharge. The management system supports 
the  addition  of  any  question  set  specific  to  an  individual  and 
feedback  can  be  defined.  The  management  system  thus  makes  it 
easy for clinicians or carers to set up the user application for that 
user’s specific needs. 

4.  Home Deployment Study Design 
At time of writing, YourWellness has been deployed for a total of 
7  months.  However,  the  evaluation  described  in  this  paper  was 
conducted at the end of month 5 of the deployment. The purpose 
of  the  evaluation  was  to  (1)  Determine  older  adults’  opinions  on 
the  usefulness  of  the  application,  particularly  the  feedback;  (2) 
Examine motivations to use such an application; (3) Examine the 
usability  of  the  application  and  how  easily  older  adults  could 
interpret their data; (4) Examine whether it increased awareness of 
wellbeing. 

4.1  Participants and Procedure 
We  recruited  8  older  adult  participants  to  take  part  in  the  study 
(5M  and  3F).  However,  one  of  the  female  participants  withdrew 
due to illness. Participant demographics are shown in Table 1. Our 
exclusion  criteria  were  those  under  the  age  of  60  and  those  who 
couldn’t provide informed consent. Of the 7 participants who took 
part, 4 had their own iPad and 3 had never used an iPad before. Of 
these 3, 2 had previously used laptops or desktops to some extent 
(p59,  p66).  None  of  the  7  participants  had  previously  used  any 
health  related  application  or  used  any  form  of  technology  for 
health  purposes.  However,  2  of  the  participants  recorded  their 
blood  pressure  in  notebooks  (p65,  p69)  while  one  recorded  his 
blood sugars (p65).  

We  visited  participants  in  their  home  to  install  the  application, 
provide  a  tutorial  on  it  and  to  carry  out  pre-trial  interviews.  We 
informed participants that they would have a new set of questions 
to  answer  daily,  but  that  they  should  answer  the  questions 
whenever  they  liked,  as  we  were  interested  in  real-world  usage 
rather than forced daily usage. We asked participants to self-report 
honestly and highlighted that their responses were not being sent 
to  anyone  other  than  themselves.  We  also  informed  participants 
that the study period was 2 months, but that they would have the 
opportunity to continue with the trial, using the application, for an 
ongoing  period  if  they  chose.  We  called  participants  after  the 
initial 2-month period to ask if they were interested in continuing 
with the trial and all but one (p60) continued. Reasons for this are 
explained in the Adherence subsection of the results. 

Figure  1.  (a)  Overview  feedback  wheel  (b)  Graph  data  for  a  person’s  self-reported  quality  of  social  interactions  (c)  Examples  of 
educational advice messages for sleep 

(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:25)

 
the 

throughout 

trial;  (3)  Post-trial 

4.2  Data Captured 
We  collected  the  following  data  for  evaluation  purposes:  (1) 
Adherence  to  self-reporting.  For  this  study,  participants  self-
reported  on  3  areas  of  wellbeing  –  mood,  sleep  and  social 
interactions  and  also  answered  a  daily  trivia  question.  Mood 
questions were asked each day and social and sleep on alternative 
days. (2) Responses to questions. From this we calculated whether 
participants  were  in  the  green,  orange  or  red  zone  for  each 
wellbeing  parameter  measured  as  well  as  changes  between  these 
zones 
interviews  with 
participants.  Data  collected  was  qualitative.  Transcription  of 
responses yielded data for content analysis. Two coders identified 
important  themes  based  on  the  frequency  and  intensity  of 
the 
participant 
interview 
the 
participant  was  asked  to  complete  a  number  of  tasks  on  the 
application  and  researchers  observed  their  interactions  and 
recorded their speech and (b) System Usability Questionnaire [2]; 
(5)  Motivation  to  use  and  continue  using  such  an  application, 
measured  through  the  Intrinsic  Motivation  Inventory  (IMI)  [5]. 
Intrinsic  motivation  is  defined  as  an  end-user’s  propensity  to 
engage  in  activities  of  interest  and  the  resultant  promotion  in 
learning  and  expansion  of  the  individual’s  capacities  [25].  We 
examined 4 subscales of the IMI - Interest/Enjoyment, Perceived 
Competence,  Pressure/Tension  and  Value/Usefulness.  This  was 
administered  during  the  post-trial  interviews.  Our  findings  are 
outlined in the following section. 

(4)  Usability,  measured  during 
(a)  Think-aloud  protocol  whereby 

responses; 
through 

5.  Results 
Table  2  shows  participant  demographics  as  well  as  scores  for 
usability  (SUS)  and  motivation  to  continue  using  (IMI  subscales 
Int/Enj,  Perc  Comp,  Pres/Tens  and  Val/Use).  Before  we  discuss 
these results, we examine adherence. 

Table  2.  Participant  demographic  information  and  results 
from the SUS (where 100 is highest score) and IMI (where 7 is 
highest score, except for Pres/Tens scale where 1 is best score) 

P ID  G  Age 

Own 
iPad 

SUS 

Int  / 
Enj 

Perc 
Comp 

Pres  / 
Tens 

Val  / 
Use 

59 

60 

64 

65 

66 

67 

69 

M  67 

F  69 

M  77 

M  75 

M  68 

F  65 

M  73 

N 

N 

Y 

Y 

N 

Y 

Y 

90 

75 

60 

90 

84 

93 

93 

Avg 

70.6 

83.6 

4.7 

5 

5.2 

6 

4.8 

7 

5.5 

5.5 

6.8 

6 

5.4 

7 

7 

7 

6.4 

6.5 

1 

1 

1.4 

3.4 

1 

1 

2.6 

1.6 

6.25 

6.75 

5 

7 

6.5 

7 

7 

6.5 

5.1  Adherence 
We  collected  data  on  adherence  to  self-reporting.  The  graph  in 
Figure  2  indicates  compliance  to  answering  questions  (i.e.  self-
reporting),  calculated  as  the  number  of  days  in  each  month  that 
questions were asked over the number of days in each month that 
questions  were  answered.  As  expected,  adherence  to  self-
reporting  was  highest  during  the  first  month,  with  an  average  of 
79.2%  adherence  across  participants.  This  dropped  to  63.1%  in 
month 2. After month 2, participant 60 dropped out of the trial as 
she  felt  that  the  categories  of  wellness  were  not  relevant  for  her. 

(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:26)

She  felt  managing  nutrition  and  physical  activities  would  be  of 
more benefit for her personally. Since the trial, we have included 
other  parameters  of  wellness  and  can  now  provide  users  with  a 
choice of categories. We have included data from p60 here as she 
took  part  in  the  post-trial  evaluations.  Otherwise,  all  participants 
wanted  to  continue  using  the  application  past  the  initial  2-month 
study  period.  A  technical  issue  with  regard  to  participant  69 
occurred during month 3 whereby this participant’s iPad went into 
‘recovery mode’ which effectively wiped his iPad and all its data. 
During  the  evaluation  stage,  the  application  was  therefore 
evaluated with mock-data to prompt discussion. Participant 69 has 
since asked for the application to be loaded onto his iPad again so 
that he can continue using it. 

Figure 2. Adherence data throughout the trial 

During  month  5,  there  was  a  period  of  10  days  when  the  server 
hosting  the  application  was  offline  due  to  technical  difficulties, 
which accounts for the sharp drop in self-reporting for this month. 
The  end  of  month  5  also  marked  the  end  of  the  trial,  when 
interviews were carried out with participants. So we can see that 3 
participants  have  continued  to  use  the  application  following  the 
official  end  of  the  trial  and  at  time  of  writing,  participant  69  has 
also  started  to  use  the  application  again.  Thus,  while  there  were 
technical  issues  that  impacted  on  the  trial,  this  is  the  nature  of 
longitudinal studies and such issues must be catered for. 

5.2  Usability 
The  average  usability  score  for  each  participant  as  measured  by 
the  SUS  is  shown  in  Table  2.  The  highest  possible  score  on  this 
scale is 100. The average score across all participants is 83.6, with 
a  range  from  60  to  93  indicating  that  participants  found  the 
application  usable.  During  the  post-trial  usability  test  where  we 
employed  the  think-aloud  method  we  observed  all  participants 
were  easily  able  to  use  and  navigate  the  application.  We  asked 
participants  to  complete  tasks  that  would  require  them  to  answer 
questions  on  the  application,  browse  and  navigate,  look  at  their 
overview data (the feedback wheel), their graphs and their advice 
messages.  

Only  two  participants  (59  and  65)  understood  the  concept  of  the 
traffic  light  metaphor  –  i.e.  the  use  of  green  to  indicate  positive 
wellbeing,  orange  to  indicate  medium  etc.  All  participants 
understood  the  graph  and  the  advice  messages  and  found  this 
information  very  useful.  This  will  be  examined  further  in  the 
Discussion section. 

5.3  Motivation 
5.3.1  Interest and Enjoyment 
Interest  and  enjoyment  are  the  most  integral  factors  of  intrinsic 
motivation.  The  mean  interest  and  enjoyment  score  was  5.5 
(standard deviation 0.8), where 7 is the highest possible score. In 
terms  of  the  individual  subscales  used  to  assess  motivation, 
interest and enjoyment had the lowest score. This was somewhat 

 
 
 
 
 
expected  as  it  is  unlikely  that  participants  would  ‘enjoy’  using  a 
reflected  by 
wellness  management  application.  This  was 
participant 
IMI  whereby 
participants  reported  finding  the  application  of  interest,  not  ‘fun’ 
or ‘enjoyable’.  

responses  when  completing 

the 

5.3.2  Perceived Competence 
Perceived  competence  within  the  IMI  relates  to  an  individual’s 
perception of how capable they are at performing a certain task. In 
our  study,  this  refers  to  the  older  adult’s  perception  of  how  well 
they  can  use  the  YourWellness  application.  The  mean  perceived 
competence  was  6.5  out  of  7  (standard  deviation  0.6).  The  high 
scores  in  perceived  competence  were  reflected  in  the  post-trial 
interviews and application walk-through, whereby we observed no 
issues with user interaction.  

5.3.3  Pressure/Tension 
The  pressure/tension  subscale  assesses  the  level  of  tension  a 
person  feels  while  performing  a  certain  task  and  is  a  negative 
predictor of intrinsic motivation. We felt it important to assess this 
for YourWellness as answering potentially sensitive questions on 
health  and  wellbeing  might  be  stressful  for  some  individuals. 
Furthermore,  becoming  more  aware  of  one’s  wellbeing  may  also 
cause tension, particularly if that person is not doing so well. The 
mean score for pressure/tension was 1.6 (standard deviation 0.97), 
where  a  score  of  1  is  a  positive  score,  indicating  that  users  felt 
quite relaxed while using YourWellness. 

5.3.4  Value/Usefulness 
A  person’s  perception  of  the  value  or  usefulness  of  using  an 
application  such  as  YourWellness  can  act  as  a  significant 
motivator  for  them  to  not  only  initially  adopt  it,  but  also  to 
continue using it. The mean value/usefulness score was 6.5 out of 
7  (standard  deviation  0.7),  indicating  that  our  participants  would 
find  it  useful  to  continue  using  YourWellness  in  the  future.  This 
scale  on  the  IMI  also  asked  participants  (1)  why  they  found  the 
application  useful  and  (2)  why  they  think  the  application  is 
important.  Some  responses  to  (1)  included  “making  you  more 
aware  of  your  wellbeing”,  “learning  things  about  yourself  that 
you normally take for granted”, “keeping an eye on your health” 
and “helping you take control of your health”. With regard to (2) 
participants felt that such an application was important because it 
can  “help  you  to  understand  how  you’re  doing”  and  “improve 
your life”. 

5.4  Other Findings 
We  asked  participants  to  name  3  good  and  3  not  so  good  things 
about  the  application.  Positive  aspects  related  to  ease  of  use  (7 
participants),  the  usefulness  of  the  feedback  (5),  the  inclusion  of 
relevant  questions  (2)  and  the  inclusion  of  mood  as  a  wellbeing 
parameter  (2).  With  regard  to  negative  aspects,  most  responses 
related  to  the  repetitiveness  of  questions  (5),  the  inclusion  of 
parameters  of  wellbeing  that  the  individual  wasn’t  necessarily 
interested in (3), and the lack of facility to ‘go back’ and change 
your answer when answering questions (2).  

6.  Discussion 
6.1  Understanding Feedback 
During  the  post-trial  interview,  all  participants  commented  on 
how  essential  feedback  on  wellbeing  is  to  using  an  application 
like  YourWellness.  During  interviews  we  asked  participants  to 
explain to us their understanding of the various feedback elements 
in the application. We began with the feedback wheel to gain an 
insight into whether participants had understood the use of green, 

this 

thing 

orange  and  red  in  the  interface.  We  found  that  the  use  of  the 
traffic  light  metaphor  was  only  understood  by  two  participants, 
p59 and p65, despite this being highlighted during the deployment 
and  initial  training  of  the  application.  “You’re  doing  the  traffic 
lack  of 
there,  no?”  (p59).  We  assume 
light 
understanding was present throughout the trial. Some participants 
associated colours with the different parameters of wellbeing: “Is 
red sleep and yellow mood? No, sleep is yellow and red is social”, 
(p67)  while  others  thought  they  were  just  part  of  a  ‘fancy’ 
interface  or  that  they  reflect  ‘your  personality’  –  “Would  they 
relate to your personality or something? Well, usually nice bright 
colours are associated with lively people, who want to be involved 
in  things”  (p60).  This  lack  of  understanding  or  interpretation 
didn’t appear to have any negative effect on participants’ desire or 
ability  to  use  the  application  –  participants  weren’t  confused  or 
weren’t  striving  to  understand  what  the  colours  might  mean 
during  the  trial.  As  highlighted  below,  participants  used  the 
graphs to interpret and understand their own data, rather than the 
feedback wheel. 

Following the study, to facilitate interpretation we have integrated 
an  information  box  that  appears  when  the  feedback  wheel  is 
launched, providing a textual explanation along the lines of “Did 
you  know  that  this  petal  can  be  green,  orange  or  red?  Green 
means….” While we don’t want to dwell on aspects of the design 
that were particular to the YourWellness application, we think it is 
important  to  highlight  some  of  these  issues  to  other  designers  of 
such  applications  for  older  adults.  While  nice  aesthetics  are 
important  in  any  application,  ensuring  data  is  easily  interpreted 
and  can  be  acted  upon  is  critical.  There  is  also  balance  to  be 
attained,  between  designing  something  that  is  easily  understood 
and thus requires little iterative explanation or ‘help’ guidance and 
ensuring  that  participants  gain  maximum  benefit  from  the 
application. Customisation seems a potential solution, for example 
allowing  users  to  ‘switch  off’  instructions  or  help  prompts  when 
they  are  comfortable  that  they  fully  understand  the  application. 
The downside is that another level of complexity is introduced for 
older  adults,  in  terms  of  additional  functionality  that  they  must 
learn. 

Graph  data  was  well  understood  by  all  participants,  as  were 
messages.  “Oh  the  graph  is  good,  it  tells  you  how  you’re  doing. 
I’ve always been a good sleeper, but if for some reason I wasn’t 
I’d want to know why. I’d prefer to see it in the 70s and 80s (% on 
the graph) than in the 30s and 40s and I’d go through the motions 
of getting it (the graph) back up there” (p64). “It was good to see 
the  graph,  you  know  and  some  days  you  were  a  way  down  and 
you’d  say  to  yourself  ‘I’ve  got  to  pick  myself  up  a  little  bit  here 
and I just have to get out’. Cos there are days you just don’t feel 
like  it.  You’d  sit  in  your  pyjamas  all  day  long  and  you’d  say  to 
yourself after that ‘It’s time I bucked myself up here. So you’d find 
you were moping about less. It was like a little prompter” (p69). 
Not  only  were  the  graphs  understandable,  they  provided  the 
greatest awareness of wellbeing. 

6.2  Increased Awareness of Wellbeing 
The  main  reason  provided  as 
to  why  participants  found 
YourWellness  useful  is  that  it  increases  one’s  awareness  of 
wellbeing.  All  seven  participants  commented  that  the  application 
increased their awareness of their wellbeing, and all stated that in 
general, they want to be more aware: “I think a lot of people take 
(health)  things  for  granted,  including  myself.  You  think  you  feel 
fine  and  everything’s  going  ok.  But  it’s  no  harm  to  see  these 
things”  (p60).  The  first  level  of  awareness  that  arose  from 
participant evaluations was that of simply answering the questions 

(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:27)

daily.  It  was  felt  that  the  questions  that  were  asked  were 
“perceptive and focused” and “they got to the heart of the matter 
and  made  you  think.”  Participants  found  the  graphs  particularly 
useful for reviewing data “to see if your patterns have changed”. 
Participants reported reflecting on those days or weeks when their 
scores were lower than normal and trying to remember what had 
happened  during  this  time  that  might  have  caused  the  low  score. 
The  advice  messages  were  overall  thought  to  be  very  useful  and 
provided  an  awareness  of  “best  practice”  with  regard  to 
maintaining healthy behaviours. “I think the advice, for me, that’s 
the best part of it. There’s brilliant advice there. And stuff I didn’t 
know  myself”  (p66).  “They’re  useful  and  they’re  common  sense, 
though I wouldn’t have necessarily known all that stuff” (p59).  

6.3  Participant Behaviours 
Evaluating  behaviour  change  is  challenging  and  complex.  As 
highlighted by Klasnja, Consolvo and Pratt “Behaviour change is 
a  complex,  long-term  process  with  high  relapse  rates.  To 
convincingly demonstrate that a technology contributed to such a 
process  requires  large-scale,  long-term  studies  than  can  typically 
not  be  done  with  early-stage  and  error-prone  systems  frequently 
developed  in  HCI”  [13].  Thus  while  we  were  interested  in  how 
participants  might  have  altered  their  behaviours  during  the  trial, 
we were not evaluating behaviour change in the traditional sense.  

During  interviews  participants  were  asked  whether  they  altered 
their  behaviour,  or  tried  new  actions  based  on  the  feedback 
provided  by  the  application.  All  participants  said  they  read  the 
advice messages regularly. However, not all followed the advice. 
Some  felt  they  were  already  following  many  of  them.  For 
example, those who were particularly active felt they didn’t need 
to  do  anything  additional  to  what  they  were  already  doing.  Yet 
they  still  reported  finding  the  messages  useful  with  one  person 
stating that they “reinforced my confidence in what I was already 
doing” (p66). 

Participants  reported  following  the  sleep  messages  more  so  than 
mood  or  social.  This  was  expected,  as  all  but  two  of  the 
participants  reported  poor  sleep  hygiene.  “I  could  see  through  it 
(the  app)  that  I  don’t  really  sleep  enough.  It  made  me  realize  I 
was  only  sleeping  5-6  hours  and  I’d  think  it  shouldn’t  really  be 
that bad” (p59). Three participants reported actively following an 
advice  message.  Participant  69  said  “some  of  the  sleep  stuff  was 
good, like not drinking coffee or alcohol before bed. I gave them a 
try.”  He  also  spoke  of  how  viewing  the  graph  data  on  his  mood 
made him “buck up” and that “you’d find you were moping about 
less”. 

Participant  64  said  the  questions  on  social  interaction  prompted 
him to be more socially active: “If you weren’t talking to someone 
for  a  while,  the  questions  would  make  you  think  of  that  and  that 
you  should  go  talk  to  that  person.  They  were  good  prompts”. 
Participant  65  reported  changing  his  sleeping  pattern:  “I  did 
(follow the messages). One of them especially. Not to drink tea or 
coffee before you go to bed. I used to drink tea about 11.30 or 12 
at  night  before  I  went  to  bed.  So  I  stopped  that  and  now  I  sleep 
better.  I’d  have  water  now  instead.”  Future  work  will  evaluate 
sustained behaviour change over longer time periods. 

6.4  Maintaining Motivation 
Given  that  one  of  the  primary  goals  of  health  self-management 
applications  is  to  maintain  a  healthy  state  of  wellbeing  and 
prevent  decline,  it  is  important  that  people  are  motivated  to  use 
these applications for the long term. Some studies have examined 
older  adults’  acceptability  of  web-based  health  applications  and 
found  that  factors  such  as  perceived  usefulness,  ease  of  use  and 

(cid:20)(cid:22)(cid:28)

healthcare knowledge are important indicators of acceptance [22]. 
In  this  section  we  discuss  how  motivation  and  long-term 
adherence  might  be  achieved  by  highlighting  potential  positive 
motivators as well as negative. Participants who continued to use 
the application past the initial 2-month trial period reported doing 
so  because  of  the  usefulness  of  the  application  in  terms  of  it 
increasing their awareness of wellbeing and because the messages 
were useful for keeping an eye on your health. The questions were 
highlighted as the primary reason, however, for drops in level of 
adherence to self-reporting.  

the  way 

Interest/enjoyment scored lowest in terms of the motivation items 
assessed  using  the  IMI.  Both  the  types  of  questions  being  asked, 
and  their  frequency,  had  a  negative  effect  on  motivation.  It  was 
also  felt  that  some  of  the  questions  were  too  ‘clinical’  and 
“slightly  complicated 
they  were  worded”  (p67). 
Participants  also  expressed  concern  that  some  older  adults  might 
become  upset  or  distressed  when  answering  some  of  the  mood 
related  questions.  Following  our  workshops  with  clinicians,  we 
had  decided  to  use  the  Center  for  Epidemiological  Studies 
Depression  Scale  (CES-D)  [24]  to  assess  mood,  as  this  would 
provide  a  valid  clinical  measurement,  which  clinicians  felt  was 
desirable  (if  participants  might  want  to  at  some  point  share  this 
information  with  a  clinician).  However,  we  have  since  decided 
that these might not be the most feasible or the best questions to 
ask daily in the home. For example, one of the question items in 
the  CES-D  asks  how  often  in  the  past  week  you  have  felt 
depressed, while another asks how often you felt your life was a 
failure. For someone who is feeling down, these questions might 
have the effect of causing further distress. We have thus decided 
to 
‘how 
happy/sad/anxious/angry  do  you  feel  today)  with  more  clinical 
measures  such  as  the  CES-D  only  being  used  to  gain  a  more  in-
depth picture if a person is continually reporting low mood. 

daily  mood 

questions 

‘global’ 

(e.g. 

ask 

Participants found the questions repetitive: “I found that daily you 
were asked the same questions. I don’t think there would be that 
much change from day to day” (p64). We asked participants how 
often they felt they should answer such questions, but no general 
consensus  emerged.  The  advice  messages  were  also  described  as 
too repetitive. While the content of the messages varied, they were 
all  in  text  format.  Participants  suggested  adding  videos,  links  to 
documentaries or articles they could read and these are integrated 
in the new design.  

While participants didn’t find the activity of using the application 
to  be  enjoyable,  they  also  didn’t  feel  it  was  a  ‘boring’  activity: 
“Gosh no, it wasn’t boring. I didn’t look at it as enjoyable. It was 
something you did every day and you got your answers back and 
that”  (p69).  Participants  also  reported  that  it  was  not  a  ‘fun’ 
activity.  This  raises  a  question  around  whether  health  apps  for 
older adults should be fun, or whether usefulness and competence 
are  sufficient  to  maintain  motivation  and  long  term  use.  In  other 
studies  we  conducted  as  part  of  the  design  of  YourWellness, 
participants reported that they felt it important that a health related 
application should retain a level of seriousness and should not be 
game-like.  Thus,  we  integrated  a  daily  trivia  question  into  the 
application  as  while  participants  might  find  this  a  fun  activity,  it 
was  also  considered  a  way  of  keeping  the  brain  “ticking  over”. 
Future  work  will  consider  further  ways  to  introduce  hedonics 
aspects into wellness applications to encourage long-term usage.  

scores 

recorded 

High 
that 
participants  would  like  to  use  such  an  application  again  in  the 
future.  Some  participants  also  highlighted  other  uses  for  the 
application, or mentioned other people they thought might benefit 

for  value/usefulness 

indicate 

from  it.  Some  of  the  younger  participants  (p59,  p66)  stated  they 
would like their parents to fill in something like this, and to share 
the  results  with  family  members.  Another  (p60)  commented:  “I 
have  neighbours  it  would  be  brilliant  for,  especially  men.” 
Another felt it would have been great for his mother when she was 
alive, as all his siblings were living away from her: “If she could 
have kept track of her mood it could have been communicated to 
us or her GP then we might have understood her better. We could 
have said ‘look, we have to do something here, she’s not a happy 
camper’” (p66). 

Given  our  findings,  it  is  likely  we  can  increase  interest  and  thus 
motivation  to  use  the  application  by  personalizing  it  to  include 
areas of wellbeing of interest to particular individuals, as well as 
through  greater  variation  of  content.  Our  next  deployment  will 
examine  this  and  the  impact  it  has  on  increasing  adherence  and 
motivation.  

older 

applications 

6.5  Design Implications 
Our findings have a number of implications for the design of self-
management 
adults.  Regarding 
for 
YourWellness,  a  number  of  redesigns  or  system  changes  have 
been  made.  Firstly,  our  ‘database’,  maintained  through  the 
management  system,  now  has  a  much  wider  variety  of  question 
sets  (i.e.  not  only  mood,  sleep  and  social,  but  physical  activity, 
falls,  diet  management)  and  also  a  larger  variety  of  questions 
within  each  of  these  sets.  Our  educational/advice  feedback  has 
also  been  updated  to  include  multimedia  content  such  as  videos, 
interactive images and practical information (such as local classes 
or events). Each day a person receives one new piece of feedback, 
relevant  to  their  current  health  state.  This  information  is  then 
archived into categories, such as mood, sleep etc. (see Figure 1c). 
The  ability  to  add  annotations  to  graph  data  to  provide  context 
was requested and has been integrated into our graph interface. 

We  recognize  that  there  are  limitations  to  our  study.  We  had  a 
relatively  small  sample  size,  due  mainly  to  having  a  limited 
number  of  devices.  However,  we  have  since  received  additional 
funding to expand this trial. More details on how participants used 
the  app  would  have  been  useful,  such  as  how  often  they  viewed 
the  feedback  wheel,  graph  and  messages.  Our  new  trial  will 
examine  these  features.  There  were  also  technical  issues  during 
the  trial  that  affected  participants’  usage  of  the  application. 
However,  this  research  has  provided  us  with  an  increased 
understanding of older adults’ attitudes and behaviours in relation 
to  wellbeing  self-management  that  can  facilitate  the  creation  of 
new,  personalized  health  and  wellbeing  interventions  for  this 
population. 

7.  Conclusion and Future Work 
There are a number of things we have learned from this study that 
we believe are applicable to designing wellness self-management 
applications for older adults in general. We believe this paper will 
provide  researchers  with  a  greater  understanding  of  how  older 
adults interpret wellbeing feedback over a longitudinal period and 
thus how best to design feedback for this population. Specifically, 
we  believe  the  following  points  will  be  useful  to  other  designers 
of  wellness 
to  ensure  such 
applications are accepted and adopted: 

technologies  for  older  adults 

• 

Self-reporting  increases  awareness  of  wellbeing  and  is 
viewed  as  a  positive  thing.  Much  research  in  this  area 
aims to reduce user involvement, through using sensors 
to gather data for example, to ensure minimal burden on 
the  user.  However,  our  research  found  that  self-
(actually  answering  questions)  supports 
reporting 

(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:19)

is 

important 

reflection,  which 
in  wellness  self-
management  and  which  can  thus  potentially  promote 
acceptance  and  adoption.  Research  by  Li  found  that 
maintaining a diary alongside sensorised data collection 
of activity levels made participants more aware of their 
physical activity levels [17, Chapter 3]. Thus supporting 
active  input  of  information  from  people  may  increase 
awareness  beyond  that  which  passive  data  collection 
provides. However, such reporting should not place too 
much  burden  on  the  person  as  this  might  affect  long-
term usage. 

• 

Long-term  adherence  is  likely  going  to  be  achieved  by 
keeping  the  application  personal  and  ‘fresh’  –  i.e. 
ensuring  questions  and  feedback  are  not  repetitive,  are 
engaging and introducing something new each day, such 
as an interesting quote, joke or trivia question. 

•  Older  adults  are  interested  in  self-managing  their 
wellness,  but  aspects  that  are  important  to  them 
personally. There must be a gained benefit. Providing a 
‘menu’  of  wellness  parameters  to  monitor  may  support 
this. 

•  Clinically  worded  questions  may  cause  confusion  or 
may  stir  up  negative  emotions.  They  may  therefore  be 
difficult  to  answer  outside  of  a  clinical  setting.    Self-
report  applications  for  older  adults  should  be  mindful 
that the language used is easily understandable and does 
not lead to upsetting emotions.  

•  Designing  feedback  that  is  easily  interpretable  is 
important.  In  the  case  of  YourWellness,  line  graphs 
were  easily  understood  and  the  preferred  method  of 
feedback.  Graphs  allowed  participants  to  ‘dig  deeper’ 
into their wellbeing trends and to reflect on anomalies in 
the data. 

• 

Supporting  the  provision  of  context,  through  user 
annotations  for  example,  is  important  to  facilitate 
reflection  on  past  events  that  might  have  caused  a 
change  in  reported  wellbeing.  The  importance  of 
context  in  supporting  interpretation  of  anomalies  in 
behaviour has been highlighted in previous studies [16]. 

The real benefit of wellness self-management applications such as 
YourWellness  can  only  be  realized  if  they  are  used  long-term. 
While  this  study  didn’t  evaluate  the  health  benefits  of  the 
application,  we  did  discover  that  it  increased  peoples’  awareness 
of  their  wellbeing  and  that  they  found  the  advice/educational 
feedback to be useful. In terms of future work, the application will 
again  be  deployed  for  long-term  use  in  a  number  of  contexts.  In 
future  trials,  we  will  evaluate  health/wellness  benefits  through 
standard clinical questionnaires administered pre- and post- trial. 

8.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The  authors  would  like  to  acknowledge  Enterprise  Ireland  who 
funded  CASALA  under  the  Applied  Research  Enhancement 
programme. 

9.  REFERENCES 
[1]  Bardram, J.E., Frost, M., Szanto, K., Faurholt-Jepsen, M., 

Vinberg, M. and Vedel Kessing, L. Designing mobile health 
technology for bipolar disorder: A field trial of the 

MONARCA system. In Proc. CHI 2013, ACM press (2013), 
2627-2635. 

[2]  Brooke, J. SUS – A quick and dirty usability scale. In 

[17] Li, I. Personal informatics and context: Using context to 
reveal factors that affect behaviour. PhD thesis, Carnegie 
Mellon University. 

Usability Evaluation in Industry, 189, Taylor & Francis. 

[18] Li, I., Dey, A.K. and Forlizzi, J. Understanding my data 

[3]  Consolvo, S. and Landay, J.A. Designing for behaviour 
change in everyday life. In IEEE Computer, 42, 6. 

[4]  CSO Ireland report Ageing in Ireland, 2007. 

[5]  Deci, E.L. and Ryan, R.M. Intrinsic motivation and self-
determination in human behaviour. Springer, 1985. 

[6]  Dewsbury, G., Clarke, K., Rouncefield, M. and Sommerville, 
I. Depending on digital design in inclusivity: extending 
inclusivity. In Housing Studies, 19, (5), 2004, 811-825. 

[7]  Doyle, J., Bailey, C., Dromey, B. and Ni Scanaill, C. BASE 
– An interactive technology solution to deliver balance and 
strength exercises to older adults. In Pervasive Health, 2010. 

[8]  Doyle, J., O’Mullane, B., McGee, S. and Knapp, B. 

YourWellness: Designing an application to support positive 
emotional wellbeing in older adults. In British Computing 
Society HCI, 2012. 

[9]  Doyle, J., Skrba, Z., McDonnell, R. and Arent, B. Designing 
a touch screen communication device to support social 
interaction amongst older adults. In BCS HCI, 2010. 

[10] Fogg, B.J., Eckles, D., Bogost, I. et al. Mobile Persuasion: 20 
Perspectives of the Future of Mobile Behaviour Change, 
2007. 

[11] Gellis, Z.D., Kenaley, B., McGinty, J. et al. Outcomes of a 

telehealth intervention for homebound older adults with heart 
or chronic respiratory failure: A randomized control trial. In 
The Gerontologist, 134, 2012. 

[12] Jimison, H., Pavel, M., Hatt, W.J., Chan, M., Larimer, N. and 

Yu, C.H. Delivering a multi-faceted cognitive health 
intervention to the home. In Gerontechnology, 9, 2, 2010, 
224. 

[13] Klasnja, P., Consolvo, S. and Pratt, W. How to evaluate 

technologies for health behaviour change research. In CHI 
’11, 2011. 

[14] Koch, S. Home tele-health current state and future trends.  

International Journal of Medical Information, 75, 2006, 565-
576. 

[15] Lane, N.D., Mohammod, M., Lin, M. et al. BeWell: A 
smartphone application to monitor, model and promote 
wellbeing. In Pervasive Health ’11, 2011. 

myself: Supporting self-reflection with ubicomp 
technologies. In UbiComp ’11, 2011. 

[19] Lin, J.J., Mamykina, L., Lindtner, S., Delajoux, G. and Strub, 
H.B. Fish ‘n’ Steps: Encouraging physical activity with an 
interactive computer game. In UbiComp ’06, Springer, 261-
278. 

[20] Marcu, G., Bardram, J.E. and Gabrielli, S. A framework for 
overcoming challenges in designing persuasive monitoring 
and feedback systems for mental illness. In Pervasive Health 
’11, 2011. 

[21] McCullagh, P.J., Nugent, C.D., Zheng, H. et al. Promoting 
behaviour change in long term conditions using a self-
management platform. In Designing Inclusive Interactions, 
2010, Springer, 229-238. 

[22] Or, C., Karsh, B-T., Severtson, D.J. et al. Factors affecting 
home care patients’ acceptance of a web-based interactive 
self-management technology. In JAMIA, 18, 2011, 51-59. 

[23] NHS National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 

(NICE). http://www.nice.org.uk/ 

[24] Radloff, L.S. The CES-D scale. A self-report depression 

scale for research in the general population. In Applied 
Psychological Measurement, 1, (3), pp. 385-401, 1977. 

[25] Ryan, R.M. and Deci, E.L. When rewards compete with 
nature: The undermining of intrinsic motivation and self-
regulation. Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation: The Search for 
Optimal Motivation and Performance. San Diego: Academic 
Press, 2000. 

[26] Thomson, H.J., Demeris, G., Rue, T. et al. A holistic 

approach to assess older adults’ wellness using e-health 
technologies. In Telemedicine Journal and e-Health, 17, 10, 
2011, 794-800. 

[27] Turner, K. et al., Arnott, A. et al., Gray, P.D. et al. Grand 

challenge in assisted living – Home care technologies. Match 
Consortium, UKCRC Grand Challenges in Computing 
Research, 2010, Edinburgh. 

[28] US Census Bureau, National Population Projections, 2008.  

[29] Uzor, S. and Baillie, L. Exploring and designing tools to 

enhance falls rehabilitation in the home. In Proc CHI 2013, 
ACM press (2013), 1233-1242. 

[16] Lee, M.L. and Dey, A.K. Reflecting on pills and phone use: 
Supporting awareness of functional abilities for older adults. 
In CHI 2011, pp. 2095-2104. 

[30] World Health Organisation. Diabetes action now: An 
initiative of the world health organization and the 
international diabetes federation. WHO Library, 2000. 

(cid:20)(cid:23)(cid:20)

 
 
 
 
