Designing in the Dark: Eliciting Self-Tracking Dimensions 
for Understanding Enigmatic Disease 

Mollie McKillop, MPH, MA 
Columbia University 
New York City, USA 
mm4234@cumc.columbia.edu 

Lena Mamykina, PhD  
Columbia University 
New York City, USA 
om2196@cumc.columbia.edu 

Noémie Elhadad, PhD 
Columbia University 
New York City, USA 
noemie.elhadad@columbia.edu 

ABSTRACT 
The  design  of  personal  health  informatics  tools  has 
traditionally been explored in self-monitoring and behavior 
change.  There  is  an  unmet  opportunity  to  leverage  self-
tracking  of  individuals  and  study  diseases  and  health 
conditions to learn patterns across groups. An open research 
question, however, is how to design engaging self-tracking 
tools  that  also  facilitate  learning  at  scale.  Furthermore,  for 
conditions that are not well understood, a critical question is 
how  to  design  such  tools  when  it  is  unclear  which  data 
types are relevant to the disease. We outline the process of 
identifying 
self-tracking 
requirements 
endometriosis,  a  highly  enigmatic  and  prevalent  disease, 
through  interviews  (N=3),  focus  groups  (N=27),  surveys 
(N=741),  and  content  analysis  of  an  online  endometriosis 
community (1500 posts, N=153 posters) and show value in 
triangulating  across  these  methods.  Finally,  we  discuss 
tensions  inherent  in  designing  self-tracking  tools  for 
individual use and population analysis, making suggestions 
for overcoming these tensions. 

design 

for 

Author Keywords 
Personal  informatics;  self-tracking;  patient-generated  data; 
enigmatic disease; endometriosis; participatory design.  

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous   

INTRODUCTION 
Today,  self-tracking  is  widely  practiced  and  common 
among  health  consumers.  For  instance,  it  is  estimated  that 
69%  of  U.S.  adults  keep  track  of  at  least  one  health 
indicator  [38].  Self-tracking  is  often  performed  passively 
through  wearable  sensors  and  fitness  trackers,  as  well  as 
proactively through self-report [7,60]. Individuals are often 
motivated  to  self-track  to  discover  new  insights  about 
themselves or to achieve a particular health-related goal [8]. 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission 
from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montreal, QC, Canada 
©  2018  Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights 
licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-562-6/18/04…$15.00  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174139 

fee.  Request  permissions 

and/or 

a 

People with chronic conditions, who are often faced with a 
complex  set  of  decisions  and  environments  to  navigate, 
have  additional  incentives  to  understand  and  manage  their 
condition, and thus engage in self-tracking.  

Self-tracking  systems  that  “help  people  collect  personally 
relevant  information  for  the  purpose  of  self-reflection  and 
gaining self-knowledge” are part of personal informatics, as 
defined  by  Li  and  colleagues  [59].  Within  the  health 
traditionally 
domain,  personal 
focused  on  self-monitoring  for  individuals  to  gain  health- 
related  self-knowledge  or  achieve  a  health-related  goal 
[26,54].  In  fact,  designs  of  such  tools  have  been  proposed 
and evaluated for many chronic diseases, including diabetes 
[5,41,69,80,91],  COPD  [12,102],  cardiovascular  diseases 
[4,96], and Parkinson’s [11,72,77].  

tools  have 

informatics 

In the context of a chronic disease, there are a large number 
of data points that may be self-tracked. They fall into a set 
of  well-known  data  types,  or  dimensions,  which  include 
signs  and  symptoms  of  the  disease,  biomarkers  and 
behavioral  markers  like  physical  activity,  treatments,  self-
management  strategies,  as  well  as  potential  environmental 
factors  [15,98].  Designers  traditionally  rely  on  current 
scientific knowledge about the disease to identify which of 
these data types, and which specific variables among them, 
to  incorporate  in  their  self-tracking  tools.  For  instance, 
current  understanding  of  diabetes  shows  that  diet  is  an 
important  dimension,  with  macronutrients  as  specific 
variables  of  relevance;  biomarkers  and  blood  glucose 
measurements in particular are important for individuals to 
self-manage  successfully.  Similarly,  environmental  factors 
like  irritants  and  allergens  are  potential  triggers  of  asthma 
and as such represent important dimensions when building 
asthma self-management solutions.  

However,  there  are  many  diseases  for  which  it  is  not  well 
understood which data types are pertinent to self-track, and 
for  which  specific  relevant  variables  have  not  been  fully 
enumerated.  This lack of knowledge  has  been  noted  in  the 
literature for rare diseases [106]. It is also significant when 
designing  for  enigmatic  diseases.  Across  several  diseases, 
enigmatic  conditions 
share  heterogeneous 
symptoms,  unexplained  differences  in  treatment  responses, 
and lack of symptom specificity [1,14,36,56,86,92].  Many 
enigmatic  diseases  are  relatively  prevalent;  in  fact,  the 
heterogeneity in symptoms may be due to the large number 
of people affected. Examples of enigmatic diseases include 

seem 

to 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 1 
 
chronic  diseases  like  interstitial  cystitis,  psoriasis,  Crohn’s 
disease,  and  chronic  fatigue  syndrome.  Irritable  bowel 
syndrome  is  another  such  chronic  condition,  where  diet  is 
an  established  data  type  to  monitor,  but  specific  diet 
triggers  are  unknown  and  in  fact  vary  from  one  patient  to 
another. Even relatively well understood diseases may have 
aspects that remain enigmatic: for example, why post-meal 
blood glucose spikes vary from one individual to another is 
an active area of research [103].  

Previous HCI research has shown success in designing self-
experimentation tools and n-of-1 studies to help individual 
users identify which specific variables are useful to monitor 
when managing their own health [50,51,105]. In such self-
experimentation  systems  however, 
the  emphasis  on 
supporting  each  user  individually  might  come  at  the 
expense  of  deriving  insights  across  all  users.  By  letting 
users  track  and  experiment  with  what  dimensions  and 
variables they think are relevant to their own experience of 
their  condition,  these  systems  promote  individual  self-
discovery, but might make it challenging to standardize and 
learn  across  individuals.  There  is  an  unmet  opportunity  to 
broaden  the  current  conceptualization  of  personal  health 
informatics to include not just self-tracking for the sake of 
self-knowledge  and  self-discovery  but  self-tracking  for 
improving  knowledge  of  disease  across  a  group.  This  is 
particularly true for enigmatic conditions. Self-tracking data 
of  enigmatic  conditions,  when  taken  in  aggregate  across  a 
user  group,  can  provide  a  novel  view  of  the  disease,  can 
help  enhance  scientific  knowledge  about  the  disease,  and 
can  help  bridge  the  gap  that  exists  between  the  patient 
experience  of  these  enigmatic  conditions  and  their  current 
medical understanding.  

Here  we  explore  the  design  of  self-tracking  tools  to 
characterize  enigmatic  conditions  and  understand  disease 
across  individuals.  Specifically,  we  aim  to  answer  the 
following research questions: (1) what data to collect from 
individuals  that  align  with  their  experience  of  disease,  and 
as  such  makes  their  self-tracking  relevant  to  them;  and  (2) 
what data to collect across individuals that may be used to 
further  capture  and  characterize  the  disease  through  a 
standard  set  of  variables.  We  focus  on  endometriosis,  a 
prevalent  yet  enigmatic  systemic  chronic  condition. 
Specifically, in this paper our goal is to identify and distill 
the  dimensions  of  disease,  along  with  specific  variables 
relevant  to  self-tracking  endometriosis.  Such  dimensions 
must  represent  the  relevant  variables  of  the  disease,  as 
experienced  by  individuals  and  help  capture  generalizable 
knowledge and discover patterns about the disease through 
learning at scale from the data generated by the individuals 
engaged in self-tracking.  

this  goal,  we  experiment  with  a  set  of 
Towards 
complementary  approaches 
the 
dimensions  relevant  to  the  experience  of  an  enigmatic 
disease.  Starting  with  preliminary  interviews  (N=3)  and  a 
series  of  five  focus  groups  (N=27),  we  elicit  basic  data 

iteratively 

identify 

to 

types,  or  dimensions,  from  people  with  endometriosis.  We 
further refine these relevant dimensions and identify a pool 
of  specific  self-tracking  variables  in  a  wider  population 
through  a  series  of  online,  anonymous  surveys  (N=741). 
These  dimensions  and  variables  are  further  triangulated 
with variables identified through the content analysis of an 
online  public,  anonymous  endometriosis  discussion  board 
(N=1,900 registered members and 1,500 active members at 
the time of analysis).  

the 

(1)  a 

following  contributions: 

Our  work  builds  upon  research  in  personal  informatics  to 
understand design of self-tracking tools. As such, this paper 
has 
series  of 
complementary  approaches  to  elicit  the  data  types  and  the 
specific  variables  relevant  to  self-tracking  an  enigmatic 
disease;  and  (2)  an  exploration  of  the  inherent  tensions  in 
characterizing a condition in a way that is both relevant to 
individuals’  experience  of  the  disease  and  meaningful  for 
analysis  at  scale.  It  also  contributes  new  knowledge  about 
endometriosis, through the elucidation of novel dimensions 
and variables relevant to the patient experience. 

BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
In  this  section,  we  review  prior  work  in  two  fields 
primarily:  personal  informatics,  specifically  technology 
research  for  self-tracking,  and  informatics  research  on 
characterizing disease at scale. We also provide background 
on our condition of interest, endometriosis, in the context of 
characterizing enigmatic conditions.   

Self-tracking 
Previous  work  in  personal  informatics  has  focused  on 
understanding motivations for the use of self-tracking tools 
and  the  implications  on  the  tools’  designs.  In  particular, 
research  has  focused  on  understanding  progress  towards 
achieving  a  particular  personal  goal  through  self-tracking, 
supporting users by providing data or knowledge that helps 
individuals  self-monitor  their  progress  [9,28,33,53,82]. 
Earlier  models  of  personal  informatics  also  helped  to 
describe  how  people  use  self-tracking  technologies  to  gain 
self-knowledge  in  the  context  of  self-monitoring  [59,66]. 
More  recent  human-computer  interaction  (HCI)  research 
has  focused  on  moving  toward  examining  self-tracking  in 
the  context  of  self-discovery  and  self-experimentation 
[32,51,57,84],  and  personal  informatics  models  have  been 
expanded  to  include  technology  that  is  not  necessarily 
associated  with  self-improvement  [34,63].  For  example, 
HCI  researchers  have  begun  exploring  self-tracking  out  of 
curiosity as part of the quantified-self movement [20,34].  

Within the context of chronic diseases, research has focused 
on how to support  people with particular health conditions 
in  self-managing  their  disease.  Self-tracking  applications 
are a particularly useful design for individuals with chronic 
disease,  given  these  individuals  dynamically  experience 
symptoms over time, and self-tracking allows for capturing 
and  documenting  these  changes  as  well  as  disease-related 
behaviors  [26].  Because  much  of  the  self-management 
process can be specific to a given individual, prior research 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 2has  also  examined 
the  use  of  customization  and 
personalization to tailor the design of self-tracking tools to 
users’  specific  needs  [2,35,58,78].  These  needs  may  also 
vary  from  disease  to  disease  and  may  make  technology 
development  across  diseases,  such  as  rare  diseases, 
challenging  [60].  Yet  there  may  be  patient  characteristics 
that  are  similar  across  users  with  even  different  conditions 
[61].   

to 

In  contrast  to  prior  work,  our  work  seeks  to  inform  the 
design of self-tracking tools when the purpose of the system 
is  not  exclusive 
individual-level  understanding  of 
disease. This work follows the trend of broadening notions 
regarding  the  goals  of  self-tracking  in  personal  health 
informatics  systems.  In  particular,  we  are  interested  in 
examining the design of self-tracking tools for people with 
enigmatic  conditions,  in  which  it  is  not  well  understood 
how  to  self-manage  symptoms  nor  is  it  clear  which 
dimensions of the disease are relevant to the disease in the 
first  place.  Further,  we  seek  to  identify  dimensions  of 
endometriosis  that  characterize  the  disease  across  many 
patients.  By  expanding  the  scope  of  design  in  personal 
informatics  in  this  way,  tension  emerges  between  the  need 
to personalize interventions to support engagement and the 
data  necessary  for  understanding  the  experience  of  disease 
at scale [73].  

Within  HCI  research  the  design  of  self-tracking  tools  for 
than  a  patient’s  personal 
purposes  or  needs  other 
understanding has been explored. For example, people with 
a  particular  condition  may  share  self-tracking  data  with  a 
clinical  provider  or  with  one’s  care  team  [47,85,100]. 
Moreover, data may be shared as part of a community [25], 
to 
commonly  as  part  of  gamification-based  features 
incentivize  engagement  with  the  tool  and  with  behaviors 
that  support  self-management  [52].  Crowdsourcing  to 
support 
self-management  has  also  been 
examined [71], and social sense-making has been explored 
as  a  feature  to  help  individuals  make  sense  of  their  own 
health  data 
[81].  Quantified  selfers’  collection  and 
exploration  of  data  is  in  an  individual  context,  but  these 
personal experiences may be shared with others [23].  

individual 

Yet there remains an opportunity to better understand how 
self-tracking  data  may  be 
to  create  new 
knowledge  about  disease  beyond  personal  discovery,  but 
rather  for  cohorts  of  people  at  scale.  Such  knowledge  is 
essential for effective management and treatment of disease 
and to advance biomedical research.   

leveraged 

The idea of leveraging the self-tracked health data of many 
individuals  to  discover  new  insights  across  a  group  is  not 
new.  Recent  research  showed  value  in  examining  a  single 
variable (e.g., number of steps per day, collected passively) 
tracked  across  many  individuals  to  learn  about  a  behavior 
(e.g.,  physical  activity)  at  the  group  level  [6].  In  this  case, 
like  in  other  recent  examples,  the  data  leveraged  was 
collected  via  existing  commercial  apps,  with  their  own  set 
of engagement strategies. However, designing self-tracking 

tools  that  promote  sustained  engagement  among  each  user 
and at the same time enable researchers to learn at scale and 
discover new disease insights is an open research question.  

far 

Recent  clinical  research,  aided  by  the  release  of  the  Apple 
ResearchKit framework, has started leveraging self-tracking 
towards  understanding  diseases  at  scale.  Studies  deployed 
thus 
rely  on  standard  surveys,  such  as  daily 
questionnaires.  Results  have  shown  promise  in  collecting 
large amounts of data from a diverse set of participants  in a 
relatively  short  amount  of  time  as  compared  to  traditional 
biomedical  research  approaches  [16,21,104].  Yet,  the  lack 
of engagement among participants of these studies eludes to 
the  fact  that  the  design  of  these  self-tracking  tools  for 
population-level disease research is not clearly aligned with 
the experience of disease. Characterizing the experience of 
disease is essential to informing the design of tools that can 
facilitate learning about enigmatic conditions at scale.    

Endometriosis: An Example of Enigmatic Disease 
Endometriosis is a women’s health disorder. It occurs when 
endometrial tissue commonly found lining the inside of the 
uterus  grows  outside  the  uterus  and  forms  lesions.  It  is  a 
prevalent condition, estimated to affect 10% of women, and 
is associated with many comorbidities [94]. 

Maybe  because  endometriosis’  primary  description  is 
pathological  in  nature  (presence  of  endometrial  lesions 
outside  the  uterus),  diagnosis  is  currently  established 
through  laparoscopic  surgery  and  histological  analysis  of 
biopsied  lesions  [13].  There  are  no  known  biomarkers  to 
help diagnose or monitor the progression of the disease [3]. 
Furthermore, its characterization is primarily driven by the 
nature of these lesions: disease stages fall into three stages –  
deeply 
and 
endometrial  cysts  [39].  Outside  of  these  surgical  stages, 
consensus description of signs and symptoms of the disease 
are limited to dysmenorrhea (painful periods) and infertility 
[17]. 

superficial 

infiltrated 

lesions, 

lesions, 

Despite  its  prevalence  and  its  presence  documented  for 
centuries  in  patients,  endometriosis  is  a  widely  enigmatic 
condition.  Its  causes  and  etiology  are  unknown.  Further, 
individuals with the condition present with a wide range of 
symptoms beyond painful periods and infertility. But there 
is no consensus neither as to which of these symptoms are 
specifically related to endometriosis nor how they might be 
associated with each other and correlate with surgical stages 
[14,95].  For  instance,  individuals  with  severe  stages  of  the 
disease  might  be  asymptomatic,  while  those  in  a  lower 
disease stage might experience debilitating pain during and 
outside  their  menses.  Further,  patients  can  present  with  all 
three types of lesions. Patients also show a wide diversity in 
their  response  to  treatments,  and  it  is  not  currently 
understood  why  and  who  will  benefit  from  particular 
treatment [45].  

Similar to the medical body, individuals with endometriosis 
have  limited  understanding  of  their  own  condition.  People 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 3with  endometriosis  experience  systemic  effects  of  the 
disease  and  consequently  suffer  a  heavy  disease  burden 
[76,90].  However,  most  of  the  symptoms  experienced  by 
people  with  endometriosis  are  not  recognized  by  the 
medical  body  as  part  of  endometriosis,  and  people  with 
endometriosis,  do  not  always  know  which  aspects  of  their 
health relate to the presence of the disease [99].  

The  large  set  of  symptoms,  their  heterogeneity  across 
individuals,  and  their  non-specific  nature  results  in  a  gap 
research  professionals 
and 
between  how  medical 
conceptualize  endometriosis  and  how  it  is  experienced  by 
patients. Such a disconnect is in fact often present in other 
enigmatic chronic conditions [36,74].   This disconnect has 
important 
the  design  of  personal 
informatics  tools  among  enigmatic  diseases  and  health 
conditions.  

implications 

for 

Characterizing Diseases Across Groups 
Historically,  the  process  of  defining  and  characterizing  a 
disease  has  been  an  ongoing  activity  in  the  biomedical 
discipline.  First,  as  a  few  similar  case  reports  emerge  that 
do  not  fit  with  previously  known  phenomena,  hypothesis 
for  the  existence  of  a  new  disease  arises.  When  more 
physicians report more cases,  scientific consensus starts to 
form  as  to  the  existence  of  the  disease  [18].  Once  it  has 
been  accepted  by  the  biomedical  community  that  a  new 
disease  exists  and  warrants 
its  own  characterization, 
scientific  consensus  is  achieved  to  describe  the  condition 
from a clinical standpoint [89].  

Many  diseases  that  were  once  considered  enigmatic  have 
become  better  understood  and  clinically  defined  by 
identifying  the  dimensions  of  the  disease,  primarily  its  
signs  and  symptoms,  as  well  as  its  boundaries,  or  the 
constellation  of  symptoms  specific  to  a  condition  and  not 
others [18].  For this to happen, collecting a wide range of 
signs  and  symptoms  across  a  wide  and  diverse  range  of 
patients, as well as other disease dimensions is the first step 
towards identifying boundaries.  

More  recent  work  in  biomedical  informatics  has  helped  to 
facilitate  this  process  on  a  larger  and  faster  scale  through 
computational  approaches 
to  characterizing  disease. 
Disease  phenotyping  helps  answer  questions  about  the 
characteristics that define a disease and the composition of 
these  characteristics  among  patients  [83].  A  computable 
phenotype  is  a  condition,  characteristic,  or  set  of  clinical 
features  that  are  derived  exclusively  from  digital  data 
[48,87].  Disease  phenotyping  has  recently  been  primarily 
explored  in  the  context  of  electronic  health  records,  but 
other forms of data, such as patient self-reports, have been 
explored [64]. In the case of enigmatic conditions, precisely 
because there is no consensus in the clinical body as how to 
describe  and  define  the  disease,  it  is  unclear  that  patient 
records are an appropriate data source for phenotyping and 
advancing  knowledge  of  these  diseases.  It  is  unlikely 
clinicians  take  the  time  to  document  the  constellation  of 
non-specific  symptoms  patients  experience  and  explicitly 

discuss it in the context of the disease, given how little time 
they have for patient interaction [88].  

In our work, our ultimate goal is similar to the research in 
disease phenotyping, but our approach differs in the type of 
data  we  propose  to  leverage.  Self-tracking  data,  which 
contains  the  direct  patient  experience,  and  circumvents 
clinical  documentation,  we  argue,  might  provide  a  more 
comprehensive  and  more  granular  characterization  of  an 
enigmatic  condition.  As  such,  our  work  contributes  to  a 
largely  unexplored  new  area  of  work,  computational 
phenotyping of disease from self-tracking data. A first step 
towards this goal is to elucidate the essential dimensions or 
facets of the experience of the disease directly from people 
with the disease.  

from 

about 

directly 

METHODS: DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS 
To  understand  the  dimensions  of  endometriosis,  data  was 
gathered through four approaches: interviews, focus groups, 
online surveys, and content analysis of posts from an online 
these 
endometriosis  patient  community.  We  selected 
methods  to  triangulate  the  experience  of  the  disease. 
Through  interviews,  surveys,  and  focus  groups,  we  can 
learn 
endometriosis 
patients 
dimensions,  each  with  varying  number  of  individuals, 
varying  degree  of  researcher  input,  and  varying  degree  of 
discussions  about  experience  of  disease  versus  disease-
tracking.  One-on-one  structured  interviews  have  a  smaller 
number of participants, but provide greater opportunities for 
the  researchers  to  interact  with  participants.  Focus  groups 
enable  for  elicitation  of  information  from  a  slightly  larger 
number  of  participants  all  the  while  letting  the  researchers 
redirect the discussions. Online surveys reach a much larger 
number of participants, but researchers do not interact with 
them beyond the set of questions they ask. At the opposite 
end  of  the  spectrum,  content  analysis  of  patient  discourse 
represents a way to elicit dimensions “in the wild,” without 
these 
any  researcher 
communities, there is also potential to capture experience of 
a  much  larger  number  of  individuals.  Our  approach  to 
elicitation  was  sequential  and  followed  standard  mixed-
methods  approaches  starting  with  a  qualitative-only 
analysis (interviews and focus groups), which helped design 
the schema for survey questions and the coding schema for 
content  analysis  [43,93].  Further,  we  varied  the  mental 
model of disease from researcher-based, generated through 
a review of the scientific literature of the disease, to patient-
based,  especially  in  regards  to  the  content  analysis,  which 
was  based  on  patients  talking  to  each  other  without  any 
researcher’s input. This overall approach was used to bridge 
the gap between patient and researcher.   

involvement.  In 

interaction  or 

In  this  section,  we  describe  each  of  these  methods  in  turn. 
All  study  procedures  were  approved  under  protocol 
#AAAP9054  by  our  institution’s  Institutional  Review 
Board  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Subjects.  Work  was 
conducted  in  the  US  for  interviews  and  focus  groups; 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 4surveys  and  forum  content  analysis  were  English-speaking 
only and conducted internationally. 

Method 1: Preliminary Interviews 
The primary goal of the interviews was to start elucidating 
the dimensions relevant to the experience of endometriosis 
according to patients to inform the design of later methods. 
Rather than specific self-tracking variables, at this stage we 
were  interested  with  exploring  the  primary  dimensions 
(e.g.,  signs  and  symptoms,  treatments,  etc.)  in  a  small 
number of women to get an initial sense of the dimensions 
quickly. Consent form and interview guide are available in 
the auxiliary materials. 

Interviews  lasting  approximately  45  minutes  each  were 
conducted  with  3  women  with  endometriosis.  Participants 
were  recruited  through  flyers  at  a  medical  center  and 
distributed  through  social  media  by  endometriosis  patient 
advocacy  groups.  Participants  were 
to 
participate in the interviews with a $25 gift card. Eligibility 
having 
criteria 
endometriosis and being over the age of 18.  In recruitment, 
diversity  of  participants  by  age  and  length  of  time  with 
diagnosis  were  prioritized  over 
representativeness. 
Participants  were  all  White/non-Hispanic  and  in  their  30s 
and  40s,  with  diagnosis  of  endometriosis  obtained  in  their 
mid-20s, late 20s and 30s.  

self-identifying 

incentivized 

consisted 

as 

of 

We  adopted  a  semi-structured  style  for  the  interviews. 
Topics  discussed  comprised  descriptions  of  signs  and 
symptoms  and 
the  disease,  diagnosis,  and  general 
experience  with  the  disease.  We  also  inquired  about  how 
much self-knowledge about the disease participants had and 
their attitude towards research in endometriosis. At the end 
of each interview, informal checking with participants was 
done  verbally  and  data  was  collected  until  saturation  was 
reached. 

Audiotapes  from  the  interviews  were  transcribed  verbatim 
and  transcripts  were  checked  against  the  audiotapes  for 
accuracy. Transcripts were then coded and analyzed.  Codes 
assigned  during  the  initial  coding  were  organized  into 
second 
themes  using 
examination of the data.  All analysis was performed using 
Excel for Mac 2011 version 14.5.5 software.  

thematic  analysis  during  a 

Method 2: Focus Groups 
The  results  of  the  preliminary  interviews  informed  the 
development of a structured guide to explore further disease 
dimensions in a larger group of people with endometriosis. 

Overall five focus groups lasting approximately 90 minutes 
each were conducted with 27 adults over the course of three 
weeks. Focus group participants were recruited via flyers in 
gynecological offices and advertising in social media from 
patient  advocacy  groups.  Eligibility  criteria  included  self-
reporting  diagnosis  of  endometriosis  through  laparoscopic 
surgery  and  being  over  the  age  of  18.  Individuals  with 
endometriosis  were  incentivized  to  participate  in  the  focus 
groups with $25 in gift cards but were ultimately paid $25 

in cash. Those who participated had not interacted with the 
research  team  before.  They  only  participated  in  one  focus 
group  each  (i.e.,  no  participants  attended  multiple  focus 
groups). Age of participants ranged from 27-60 years of age 
with a mean of 37.5 years, and age at diagnosis ranged from 
18-40 with a mean of 29.4 years. Participants were mostly 
White/non-Hispanic  (77.8%),  but  there  were  also  Asian 
women (7.4%), Hispanic (7.4%) and Black women (7.4%) 
represented.  Consent  form,  focus  group  guide,  and 
codebook are available in the auxiliary materials.  

to 

related 

The focus group guide was used to direct the conversation 
toward  eliciting  the  dimensions  of  the  disease.  Questions 
were distinguished between those that helped us understand 
how participants made sense of the disease, such as disease-
relevant  symptoms,  and  self-tracking  of  signs  and 
symptoms.  For  questions 
self-tracking, 
participants  were  told  of  our  explicit  goal  to  build  a  self-
tracking  tool,  with  participants  working  towards  self-
tracking dimensions and prioritizing them. In particular, the 
group  was  prompted  to  discuss  preferences  for  tracking 
particular  disease  dimensions  and  ranked  them  in  how 
relevant  they  are  to  their  experience  of  the  disease  as  well 
as  to  phenotyping  endometriosis.  Current  approaches  to 
their  disease  were  also  discussed,  with 
self-tracking 
participants  also  discussing  what 
track  about 
endometriosis and how [70]. At the end of each focus group 
and informal checking with participants was done verbally 
and data was collected until saturation was reached. 

they 

Each  focus  group  was  audio  recorded  and  transcribed 
verbatim;  transcripts  were  checked  against  the  audiotapes 
for  accuracy.  Transcripts  were  coded  and  analyzed  by  two 
independent  coders  using  thematic  analysis  and  Nvivo 
version  11.  The  two  coders  independently  familiarized 
themselves  with  the  data  and  identified  initial  codes  that 
were iteratively refined, named, and defined in a codebook. 
then  re-coded  by  each 
The  focus  group  data  was 
independent  coder  using 
the  codebook  codes  and 
corresponding  definitions.  From  the  codes,  major  themes 
related  to  dimensions  of  the  disease  were  identified.  Inter-
rater  reliability  was  calculated  for  each  dialogue  turn  and 
aggregated for each code, and the Cohen’s Kappa scores for 
each  theme  was  averaged  over  all  codes  [27].    Overall, 
there  was  strong  inter-annotator  agreement  with  Kappa 
ranging  from  0.79  to  0.86  across  each  theme,  and  0.85 
across all identified themes. 

Method 3: Online Surveys 
Surveys were conducted to refine dimensions and elucidate 
tracking  variables.  Based  on  the  dimensions  identified  and 
prioritized  and  the  particular  variables  discussed  by  focus 
group  participants,  we  developed  questionnaires,  with 
questions  focusing  on  a  dimension  of  disease.  Participants 
were also informed of our explicit goal of designing a self-
tracking tool. We split the questions across two anonymous 
online  surveys,  and  advertised 
through  patient 
advocacy groups and their social media feeds. 

them 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 5Overall, the two anonymous surveys comprised N=741 and 
N=505 answers, although not every question was answered 
by all participants. Most respondents were 30-33 years old 
(Figure  1)  and  over  80%  had  been  diagnosed  officially 
through  surgery  while  the  rest  were  diagnosed  unofficially 
or suspected diagnosis (see Table 1 of survey answers in the 
auxiliary materials).  

Figure 1. Age distribution of survey respondents (N=504). 

Participants  were  not  provided  with  any  incentive  for 
participating.  Anyone  could  participate  in  the  online 
surveys, but only the results for those who self-identified as 
having been diagnosed with endometriosis were included in 
the analysis of disease dimensions and tracking preferences. 
Duplicate  responses  were  discarded  (seven  in  the  first 
survey  and  five  in  the  second).  Two  surveys  were 
conducted in order to decrease the length of one survey and 
increase the likelihood of respondents completing an entire 
survey.  

The surveys comprised of both structured and unstructured 
questions.  After  basic  demographics  and  diagnosis  status 
questions, Survey 1 asked about the following dimension of 
endometriosis: emotions, moods, and affects; pain locations 
and  descriptions;  medication  use;  and  self-management 
  Survey  2  asked  about  other  diagnosed 
strategies. 
conditions 
types  of  diets 
(or  comorbidities);  and 
experimented  with.  The  survey  also  focused  on  the 
dimensions  of  endometriosis  around  menstruation  and  the 
menstrual  cycle.  In  particular,  we  were  interested  in 
understanding 
the  experience  of 
endometriosis  is  linked  to  the  different  phases  of  the 
menstrual cycle. Thus, Survey 2 asked about the following 
variables:  absence/presence  of  periods  in  the  last  three 
months and reasons for not having periods; period duration 
and  cycle 
length  when  appropriate;  hormone-induced 
versus natural cycle; period regularity; and type of feminine 
hygiene products used.  

to  which  extent 

Survey  data  was  aggregated  and  frequency  counts  were 
calculated  for  questions  with  structured  survey  responses. 
Free-text  responses  were  mapped  to  particular  variables  of 
the  disease,  and  medications  and  hormonal  treatment 
responses  were  mapped 
their  medication  classes. 
to 
Analysis  was  carried  out  using  RStudio  Software 
Version 1.0.136  and  Excel  for  Mac  2011  version  14.5.5 

software.  A  full  table  of  all  frequency  counts  of  variables 
(pain;  moods, 
across  disease  dimensions 
and 
emotions, 
hormones; 
triggers; 
menstruation) are available in the auxiliary materials.     

surveyed 
comorbidities;  medications 

effects; 
self-management 

strategies  and 

Method 4: Content Analysis  
To  identify  dimensions  of  the  disease  without  interference 
from the potential biases of the researchers, we analyzed the 
content  of  an  online  health  community.  The  publicly 
available social platform Reddit was utilized, and the r/endo 
board in particular. Our goal for the content analysis was to 
enumerate  and  elucidate  further  the  variables  to  track 
amongst the dimensions identified in the other approaches. 

The r/endo board comprised 1,900 subscribed members and 
1,500  posters  at  the  time  of  analysis.  Overall,  the  board 
contains  18,061  posts,  among  them  1,936  threads  and 
16,125  comments.  As  testament  to  its  level  of  activity,  the 
board has grown tremendously in the past year, and to date 
there are about 3,590 members. As such, it presents a good 
opportunity  to  observe  and  learn  from  patients  directly 
about their experience of the disease. Furthermore, in order 
not  to  bias  our  results  in  any  way,  we  made  sure  never  to 
advertise our work in this particular forum.   

A  subset  of  80  threads,  corresponding  to  859  posts,  was 
selected for manual coding. The corpus comprised the first 
50  threads  in  the  discussion  board  and  30  random 
subsequent  threads.  Overall  the  subset  represented  posts 
from 153 unique posters and as a whole a corpus of 95,500 
words. 

The annotations were carried out in the Brat annotation tool 
(http://brat.nlplab.org/).  Brat  enables  annotation  of  phrases 
(and  disjoint  phrases)  according  to  customized  categories 
(in  our  case  disease  dimensions),  as  well  as  coding 
additional  customizable  attribute  information  about  each 
annotated  phrase.  Mentions  of  variables  corresponding  to 
specific  dimensions  of  endometriosis  were  manually 
annotated, along with a range of attributes. 

A  detailed  coding  schema  along  with  coding  guidelines 
were developed. We aimed to annotate any explicit mention 
of  a  variable  under  the  following  dimensions:  disorders 
(i.e., mentions of signs, symptoms, findings, and diseases); 
medications;  supplements;  medical  procedures;  biomarkers 
and diverse laboratory tests; emotions, moods, and affects; 
and  activities  of  daily  living.  To  facilitate  subsequent 
analysis,  each  entity  was  mapped  to  standard  ontologies 
whenever  possible.    For  instance,  the  mention  “BC”  was 
manually  mapped  to  the  standard  concept  “birth  control 
pill.”  We  relied  on  the  standard  terminology  from  the 
UMLS  (Unified  Medical  Language  System)  for  these 
mappings.  

Coders  annotated  a  variety  of  attributes  for  each  coded 
entity.  For  instance,  for  disorders,  in  addition  to  their 
mention  they  also  had  the  following  information  coded: 
negation  status,  uncertainty  status,  who  experienced  it  (the 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 6 
patient, someone else, or no one, i.e., a generic mention of 
the  disorder),  who  attributed  it  to  the  experiencer  (the 
patient  or  someone  else),  and  whenever  relevant,  which 
body  location  was  affected.  For  medications,  supplements, 
and medical procedures, we also kept track of mentions of 
efficacy  whenever  discussed  explicitly  by  the  post  author. 
For instance, in the sentence “my gynecologist thinks I have 
IBD,”  the  term  IBD  was  coded  as  a  disorder,  experienced 
by the patient, but attributed to the patient by someone else. 
In  contrast  in  the  sentence  “at  night,  my  belly  gets  so 
bloated,”  the  words  “belly”  and  “bloated”  get  coded  and 
mapped to the concept of “endo belly” (a known symptom 
of  endometriosis  amongst  patients),  experienced  by  the 
patient, and attributed by the patient as well.  

Every post in the corpus was annotated by two independent 
coders, and adjudicated by a third coder. To analyze which 
specific  variables  within  the  dimensions  of  interest  were 
discussed by patients on the board, we kept track of coding 
phrases, along with their attributes. For this study, because 
of  our  goal  to  elucidate  variables  about  the  patient 
experience  of  endometriosis,  we  only  kept  track  of  the 
variables that were experienced by patients specifically, and 
attributed  to  them  by  patients  as  well.  We  ignored  other 
variables, like conditions attributed by others to patients, for 
instance.  

IDENTIFYING  DIMENSIONS  OF  DISEASE 

RESULTS: 
RELEVANT TO SELF-TRACKING 
Overall,  a  set  of  specific  self-tracking  dimensions  relevant 
to the experience of endometriosis were elicited.  

Interviews 
Several  broad  themes  emerged  from  the  preliminary 
interviews including pain and other symptoms, activities of 
daily  life,  treatments,  self-management,  and  emotional 
burden of the disease. Menstruation was also a topic on its 
own.  Each  participant’s  experience  of  the  disease  was 
unique, but all participants experienced pain related to their 
endometriosis,  and 
significant  and 
debilitating.  For  example,  I3  compares  their  pain  to  labor 
“So, when I was in labor, my earliest stages of labor, it felt 
a lot like cramps I have during my period.”  

this  pain  was 

Pain  also  had  a  significant  impact  on  each  participant’s 
daily  life.  Examples  of  variables  related  to  activities  of 
daily  life  including  missing  work  and  social  occasions 
because of endometriosis-related pain. I3 states that “When 
I have periods, when it starts, I have a hard time getting out 
of  bed  and  doing  my  normal  routine.”  Yet,  the  periodic 
nature of symptoms meant that participants who understood 
their patterns could plan for them.  I2 says “You would have 
to  worry  about  what  you’re  wearing  because  you’re 
bleeding  so  much  and  so  you  kind  of  have  to  plan 
accordingly.”  

When participants experienced disease flares, this impacted 
their  daily  life,  avoiding  intimate  contact  with  their 
partners. I3 describes symptomatic episodes as feeling like 

“Please  do  not  touch  me  at  all.”  Participants  also  isolated 
themselves  from  work  and  other  responsibilities  as  I2 
relates  “Okay,  so,  sometimes  the  pain  was  so  intense  that 
when you’re in pain like that, you just can’t do what you’re 
supposed  to  do…I  kind  of  know  when  those  days  or  when 
you’re  expecting  to  have  pain  and  so…I  think  to  some 
extent I did plan my life a little bit around that.” 

In treating their disease, a variety of medications were tried. 
Participant I2 states “I was using a lot of over-the-counter 
pain  medications,  and  I  was  taking  like  lots  of  Tylenol  at 
some  point,  like  [a]  small  jar,  in  a  day  or  something.” 
However, the side effects of different treatments were also 
problematic and had a significant impact on quality of life. 
I3  relates  this  sentiment  “I  can  take  normal  birth  control 
but  I'm  like  a  sexless  zombie  […]  and  then  anything  with 
Lupron sounds terrible.”  

to 

The  existing  lack  of  effective  medical  treatments  led 
participants 
self-management 
experiment  with 
techniques:  I3  says  “drinking  very  little  alcohol,  no 
caffeine,  just  eating  hardly  anything  …  and  being  very 
careful  about  what  I  was  eating”,  as  well  as  exercise,  as 
described by I1 “I try to run like two to three times a week 
and  that  helped”.    While  these  self-management  strategies 
were  not  a  cure-all  for  symptoms,  they  did  provide 
psychological  benefits.  For  example,  I3  describes  how  “I 
can deal with the pain if I can just know what I'm doing and 
it does not actively contribute to it.”  

Focus Groups 
From  the  focus  groups,  a  set  of  nine  dimensions  emerged 
and  were  ranked  by  participants  as  critical  to  self-track. 
These  included:  pain;  gastro-intestinal  and  genitourinary 
symptoms;  other  symptoms;  menstruation;  comorbidities; 
treatments;  self-management  strategies;  life  events;  and 
moods, emotions, and affects.   

the  disease,  and 
Pain  remained  a  major  aspect  of 
participants  vividly  described  their  pain  in  terms  of  its 
location, severity, and specific qualities, “I had this window 
of time where I got this same exact burning horrible can’t-
 This  example  also 
speak-to-me  abdominal  pain”. 
highlights  the  temporal  aspect  of  the  disease.  “I'm  in 
excruciating pain for about five to six days”, yet symptoms 
also varied throughout the day, “how I'm feeling at 8am is 
not  necessarily  how  I’m  feeling  at  7pm.”.  The  effects  of 
pain  on  activities  of  daily  living  were  also  an  issue  “Like 
pain  during  sex  is  a  big  symptom  for  me  and,  umm,  like  I 
literally  like  avoid  sex  too  because  of  this”.  A  number  of 
symptoms  beyond  pain  were  also  identified.    In  particular, 
gastrointestinal and genitourinary symptoms were described 
in descriptive terms by quality and location “It’s like all of 
the bloating is putting pressure on my bladder too”.  

Other symptoms were discussed and were more systemic in 
nature,  “It’s  like  fatigue  and  then  also  feeling  like  I'm 
getting a cold”. The systemic nature of symptoms lead to a 
that  participants 
discussion  of  comorbid  conditions 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 7experienced,  “I  still  have,  I  think,  some  allergy  issues  or 
autoimmune  issues”.  These  symptoms  also  occurred  in  a 
periodic  fashion,  similar 
to  pain,  as  one  participant 
describes, “I get fever and a cold every month”.  

The cyclical nature of symptoms highlights the importance 
of  the  hormonal  cycle  as  one  of  the  dimensions  of  the 
disease.  Menstruation  is  an  important  aspect  not  just 
because of its correlation with other symptoms but because 
excessive bleeding was a symptom on its own “The last few 
years,  bleeding  was  life  threateningly  excessive  at  times 
and  [I  had]  anemia”.  Other  menstrual  symptoms  were 
identified 
spotting, 
like  breakthrough  bleeding  and 
“Spotting  is  –  yeah,  I  mean  the  whole  gamut  [bleeding]  I 
think  is  very  important”.  There  was  also  consensus  that 
infertility  and  its  host  of  complications  and  treatments 
should  be  a  dimension  although  for  most  there  was  no 
interest in tracking this.  

Day-to-day  activities  were  also  discussed  as  an  important 
relationships  were 
self-tracking  dimensions.  Personal 
affected  “just  casual  sex  is  like  annoying…”,  along  with 
work  productivity  and  performance,  “I  sweat  and,  you 
know,  you're  moving  up  the  career  ladder  and  you're  like 
fearing that you can’t go to work or like meetings”. Due to 
the  severity  and  impact  of  symptoms  on  quality  of  life, 
participants  experienced  strong  negative  emotions,  “I  was 
so  depressed  that  I  felt  sick  every  day  in  some  way,  shape 
or form”.  

the 

interviews,  self-management 

Like 
techniques  and 
medications  were  discussed  at  length  in  the  context  of  a 
lack  of  effective  options.  Dietary  triggers  emerged  as  an 
important  self-management  strategy:  “I  look  at  what  and 
when  I  eat”,  as  well  as  exercise,  “I  take  a  walk  with  my 
dog”.  

Online Surveys 
Survey  responses  identified  similar  dimensions  of  the 
disease as the focus groups, and a wider range of variables 
was elicited for each dimension. Pain was reported in more 
than 50 body locations along with over 150 descriptions of 
pain  (Figure  2  for  the  top  15  and  Table  2  and  Table  3  of 
survey answers in the auxiliary materials). In comparison to 
established  symptoms  of  endometriosis,  the  range  of  pains 
reported by patients is much wider and more granular.  

Participants reported over 60 emotions, moods, and affects 
related  to  their  experience  of  endometriosis.  Most  were 
negative  and  similar  to  those  in  the  focus  groups.  The  top 
emotions  were  frustrated, 
irritable,  anxious,  stressed, 
mentally  foggy  and  overwhelmed  (see  Table  4  of  survey 
answers in the auxiliary materials).  

Over  25  comorbidities  were  reported,  with  prevalent 
conditions,  such  anxiety  and  depression,  and  reproductive 
and gastro-intestinal conditions ones like ovarian cysts and 
irritable bowel syndrome (see Table 5 of survey answers in 
the auxiliary materials). In addition a heavy disease burden 

of  four  comorbidities  on  average  per  respondent  was 
reported—more than in the general population [97].   

Figure 2. Top 15 pain locations and descriptions (N=737). 
Word size indicates frequency. 

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

600

400

200

0

N S AID s

A nalgesics
C ycle R egulators

C annabinoids
G N R H A gonist
A ntidepressants
O pioids

G A B A-analog

H R T

M uscle R elaxers

Medication

Figure 3. Combined top 10 medications (N=719) and 
hormones (N=204). 

Figure 4. Top 15 self-management strategies (N=695). 

Congruent with focus groups, participants also used a wide 
range  of  medications  and  hormones  (Figure  3  and  Table  6 
of  survey  answers  in  the  auxiliary  materials;  medications 
had  N=719 
respondents  and  hormones  had  N=204 
respondents).  There  was  heavy  use  of  medications    as 
compared  to  the  general  population  with  about  three 
medication  classes  reported  per  participant—a  typical 
finding  for  chronic  disease  patients  [22,42].  The  most 
prevalent  treatments  included  hormonal  cycle  regulators 
and  pain  killers,  including  analgesics,  anti-inflammatory, 
and opioids.  

Participants  experimented  with  a  wide  range  of  self-
management  approaches  (Figure  4  and  Table  7  of  survey 
answers in the auxiliary materials). Similar to other chronic 
conditions,  participants  used  an  average  of  about  three 
different approaches to manage symptoms [55] . 

The surveys confirmed the findings of the focus groups, but 
also  described  a  larger  range  and  granularity  of  variables 
for tracking. A large set of respondents had not menstruated 
in the past three months (Table 8 of survey answers in the 
auxiliary  materials),  but  still  experienced  many  of  the 
symptoms  of  endometriosis,  indicating  that  even  the  most 
basic  characterization  of  the  disease  according  to  the 
medical  body  (period  cramps)  might  not  be  an  accurate 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 8 
 
representation of the patient experience (Figure 3 of survey 
answers in the auxiliary materials).   

of 

coded 

dimensions 

discussions 

Content Analysis 
The  content  analysis  of  the  Reddit  endometriosis  board 
confirmed the aspects of the disease identified in the focus 
groups  and  online  surveys.  Of  note,  out  of  the  6,000 
manually 
of 
endometriosis,  most  variables  were  about  the  patients 
(rather  than  generic  mentions),  but  a  high  proportion  of 
them were attributed to them by others and were discussed 
as  examples  of  misdiagnoses  or  even  stigma  related  to  the 
disease.  Frequent  such  disorders  for  instance  included 
“absence 
and 
“hypochondria.”    While  these  disorders  should  not  be 
their  sheer 
into  self-tracking  variables, 
incorporated 
frequency in our corpus was surprising.  

endometriosis,” 

seeker,” 

“drug 

of 

Analysis of the variables mentioned and experienced by the 
patient  indicated  that  some  dimensions  contain  a  finite  set 
of variables. For instance, we identified about 20 variables 
within  the  GI  and  urinary  problems.  Similarly,  there  were 
about 30 pain locations that were identified under the pain 
dimension. Some other dimensions, however, did not seem 
to  converge  across  the  corpus  in  prevalence.  There  were  a 
very large set of self-management strategies discussed, and 
diet  and  exercises  became 
their  own  dimensions, 
themselves  with  a  wide  range  of  variables  that  could  be 
self-tracked  by  patients  (e.g.,  dairy-free  diet,  soy-free  diet, 
gluten-free  diet,  avoiding  red  meat,  etc.).  While  it  is 
expected to see a large pool of variables for dimensions like 
treatments, the fact that there is no evidence in the literature 
for what works makes the pool of variables larger. Patients 
are left to experiment on their own. 

DISCUSSION 
Our  findings  confirm  that  different  data  sources  of  patient 
experience  provide 
elicit 
dimensions of endometriosis.  

complementary  ways 

to 

A Holistic, Patient-Aligned View of Endometriosis 
Our process appears to be particularly useful in the context 
of an enigmatic disease like endometriosis. As compared to 
survey-based  methods,  we  confirmed  many  of  the  known 
dimensions,  such  as  pain  and  menstruation,  but  also 
identified  a  more  holistic  view  of  the  disease  with  a  wider 
range  of  dimensions,  each  with  greater  granularity  of 
variables  [37].  Qualitative  studies  of  endometriosis  put  a 
heavy 
focus  on  pain  as  a  primary  symptom  of 
endometriosis  [31,101].  However,  previous  work  reports 
intensity of pain, with little exploration of the types of pain, 
pain location, and how it is experienced [30]. Our methods 
identified specific body locations affected by endometriosis 
pain  (e.g.,  sacrum,  abdomen)  and  specific  types  of  pains 
(e.g., twisting, burning). Similarly, for other dimensions of 
the  disease,  our  methods  enabled  discovery  of  a  larger 
range of relevant variables. For instance, Hungtington et al. 
identify  rectal  and  anal  pain,  along  with  diarrhea  and 
constipation  as  important  gastro-intestinal  symptoms  [49]. 

Our  analysis  identified  in  addition  nausea,  heartburn,  gas, 
fullness,  and  vomiting,  as  frequent  symptoms  reported  by 
patients. Finally, we also identify the dynamic nature of the 
signs  and  symptoms  experienced  by  patients,  which  vary 
throughout  the  menstrual  cycle,  day  to  day,  and  for  some 
moment  to  moment—a  phenomenon  not  described  in  the 
literature  previously.  The  answers  to  our  online  surveys 
also  indicated  that  the  relationship  between  symptoms  and 
phases  of  the  menstrual  cycle  were  not  as  clear  as 
established in the literature [29]. 

From Patient Experience to Self-Tracking Variables 
Beyond  identifying  the  dimensions  of  the  disease,  the 
activities  and  discussions  during  the  focus  groups  helped 
assess the attitude and motivations for using a self-tracking 
tool  for  the  sake  of  endometriosis,  as  well  as  prioritizing 
which self-tracking dimensions and corresponding variables 
would  be  useful  in  a  self-tracking  app  [70].  The  online 
surveys  and  content  analysis  helped  extend  the  range  of 
variables under each dimension.  

Given  the  large  number  of  self-tracking  variables  that  can 
be  tracked  and  the  current  means  of  tracking  as  described 
by  participants  in  the  focus  groups,  self-reports  were 
considered  by  participants  as  a  reliable  way  to  track 
endometriosis  for  themselves  and  for  learning  about  the 
disease  at  scale.  Passive  sensing  was  not  considered  an 
appropriate modality by participants, except potentially for 
simple physical activity monitoring like step count. 

The  online  surveys  and  the  content  analysis  helped 
determine which variables would easily be standardized in a 
self-tracking tool or rather left open for users to customize. 
For  instance,  the  diet  dimension,  because  of  its  very  large 
range  of  variables  identified  in  the  content  analysis,  was 
determined to stay an “open” self-tracking dimension, while 
the pain dimension was standardized to 30 pain locations.  

understanding 

Characterizing Disease from Self-Tracking Data at Scale 
Beyond  the  typical  goal  of  self-monitoring  and  self-
management,  the  identified  dimensions  can  be  used  to 
inform  the  design  of  a  self-tracking  tool  that  allows  for 
users.  
better 
Specifically,  self-tracking  tools  are  appealing  because  they 
enable  collection  of  a  large  and  diverse  set  of  people  with 
endometriosis  as  compared  to  traditional  research  methods 
and  allow  for  studying  dynamic  variation  in  disease 
symptoms  over  time.  The  disease  dimensions  identified 
through the approach presented in this study are well suited 
to the requirements of computational phenotyping.   

endometriosis 

across 

Although  identification  of  disease  dimensions  is  useful  for 
the  experience  of  endometriosis,  additional 
capturing 
factors  need  to  be  considered  in  characterizing  disease  at 
scale.  Completeness  and  accuracy  are  important  data 
characteristics    for  high-quality  phenotyping  [48].  In  the 
context  of  enigmatic  diseases  this  translates  to  a  need  to 
collect  a  standard  set  of  data,  namely  variables  of  the 
disease,  and  do  so  in  a  longitudinal  fashion  in  order  to 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 9capture  the  dynamic  variations  and  accurately  represent 
disease  experience.  Therefore,  design  of  the  self-tracking 
tool  needs 
information  needs  of 
these 
researchers,  and  engage  people  with  a  particular  condition 
in tracking a standard set of disease dimensions over time.  

to  support 

Implications  for  Design  of  Self-Tracking  Apps  for 
Enigmatic Diseases 
First, because user engagement is critical to success, design 
of a self-tracking tool might include dimensions that are not 
a-priori  important  to  the  ultimate  goal  of  the  tool.  When 
dealing with an enigmatic disease, it is not clear in advance 
which  of  these  dimensions  will  in  fact  contribute  to  its 
phenotyping.  For  instance,  emotions,  affects,  and  moods 
might  not  end  up  part  of  an  endometriosis  phenotype,  but 
there is still value to them, because they align with the way 
patients  experience  the  disease.  If  tracking  emotions  is 
important  to  patients’  self-management,  then  they  will  be 
more likely to engage with self-tracking in general.  

[58,78].  For 

role  of  personalization 

Second,  the  choice  of  self-report  in  the  design  of  the  self-
tracking  app  makes  engagement  even  more  critical.  To 
engage individuals, previous research has demonstrated the 
important 
the 
dimensions with a too large set of variables, personalization 
in self-tracking presents a perfect opportunity. Orienting the 
design  of  self-tracking  tools  around  a  particular  user’s 
individual  information  needs  and  goals,  such  as  making 
sense  of  one’s  disease,  is  useful  in  reducing  the  burden  of 
self-tracking, can make self-tracking more meaningful, and 
thus  engages  the  individual  self-tracker  further  [65,67,68]. 
Negative  experiences  can  also  influence  engagement,  and 
tracking  pain,  for  example,  may  remind  patients  they  are 
sick and discourage use.  In the case of endometriosis, it is 
also  known  the  patients’  symptoms  have  historically  been 
stigmatized  and  ignored.    For  this  reason,  they  may 
overcome  any  apprehensions  they  have  about  tracking  in 
order for their symptoms to be recognized [10,46]. 

Third,  some  of  our  identified  self-tracking  dimensions  are 
complex. For instance, pain may vary in time and location 
within  an  individual,  as  well  as  across  individuals.  Other 
(e.g., 
symptoms  vary  at  different 
menstruation at the day level, GI symptoms at the moment 
level).  Thus,  a  self-tracking  tool  that  aligns  with  patient 
experience  of  endometriosis  needs  to  enable  tracking  at 
is  not 
different 
traditionally accounted for in pain diaries [75]. Further, the 
analysis  of  the  self-tracked  data  also  needs  to  take  these 
varying resolutions into account in a longitudinal manner.  

feature  which 

resolutions,  a 

resolutions 

time 

time 

Finally,  some  of  our  identified  self-tracking  dimensions 
may  influence  each  other.  Associations  between  pain  and 
other variables, such as mood, have been investigated in the 
literature,  and  it  is  known  that  low  mood  may  lead  to  less 
pain  tracking  [19,79].  This  supports  further  the  argument 
that  a  self-tracking  tool  for  an  enigmatic  condition  should 
have  a  wide  range  of  variables,  such  that  potential 
confounders and associated variables can then be identified. 

Few  of  these  associations  are  currently  understood  for 
endometriosis,  and  a  self-tracking  tool  will  help  towards 
investigating these relationships.   

application, 

Based  on  the  findings  of  this  study,  we  have  developed  a 
self-tracking 
are 
experimenting  with  engagement  strategies  motivated  by 
self-determination  theory  and  citizen  science.  To  date, 
Phendo is used by 3,000 participants from 65 countries.  

called  Phendo, 

and 

Limitations 
This  study  has  several  limitations.  First,  the  endometriosis 
diagnoses  of  survey  and  online  community  participants 
were  self-reported,  without  us  contacting  the  participants 
for confirmation. However, we did not identify any trolling 
information in the Reddit posts, and only considered survey 
responses  posted  within  5  days  of  advertising  in  patient 
advocacy groups. Second, there might be a selection bias to 
the participants in our study. Social media users tend to be 
younger than the general population and those who are part 
of patient advocacy groups are probably more health literate 
than  an  average  person  with  endometriosis  [24,40,44]. 
Third,  patients  who  are  sicker  may  also  be  more  likely  to 
engage  in  research-related  activities.  In  fact,  there  is 
evidence  of  this  bias  in  the  data  collected  through  Phendo 
so far, where our participating population is young and with 
predominantly  severe  diagnosis  of  endometriosis.  Finally, 
this study focuses on eliciting information from people with 
endometriosis,  and  as  such  lacks  a  comparison  group  that 
represents  healthy  women  with  a  “normal”  menstrual 
experience. The last two limitations affect in particular our 
goal  of  learning  at  scale  from  self-tracked  data  and 
discovering 
characterize 
endometriosis.  In  our  current  work,  as  part  of  the  Phendo 
study,  we  are  exploring  recruitment  that  targets  particular 
populations  (women  without  endometriosis  diagnosis,  as 
well  as  women  with  less  severe  endometriosis).  For  these 
populations,  we  are  exploring  principles  of  citizen  science 
to engage them in self-tracking for endometriosis research. 

patterns 

help 

that 

can 

CONCLUSION 
We  contribute  an  understanding  of  the  design  of  personal 
health  informatics  tools  that  leverage  the  self-tracking  of 
individuals  to  better  understand  group-level  characteristics 
of  diseases.  For  diseases  or  health  conditions  where  the 
relevant dimensions of the disease are not well understood, 
we outline a process for designing self-tracking tools in this 
context.  We find there is value in examining different data 
sources  to  elicit  the  relevant  dimensions  of  a  disease.  
Triangulation across these sources informs what constitutes 
the experience of disease, indicating it is feasible to capture 
the  disease  experience  directly  from  people  with  a 
particular health condition.   

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by the Endometriosis Foundation 
of  America  and  the  National  Science  Foundation  award 
#1344668. We thank the study participants and are grateful 
to the reviewers for their valuable feedback.  

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 10REFERENCES 
1.  Pedro Acién and Irene Velasco. 2013. Endometriosis: 
A Disease That Remains Enigmatic. ISRN Obstetrics 
and Gynecology 2013. 

2.  Elena Agapie, Lucas Colusso, Sean A. Munson, and 

Gary Hsieh. 2016. PlanSourcing: Generating Behavior 
Change Plans with Friends and Crowds. In 
Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on 
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing (CSCW ’16), 119–133. 

3.  Soo Hyun Ahn, Vinay Singh, and Chandrakant 
Tayade. 2017. Biomarkers in endometriosis: 
challenges and opportunities. Fertility and Sterility 
107, 3: 523–532. 

4.  Reem Albaghli and Kenneth M. Anderson. 2016. A 
Vision for Heart Rate Health Through Wearables. In 
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint 
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing: 
Adjunct (UbiComp ’16), 1101–1105. 

5.  Sam Alexander. 2015. mHealth Technologies for the 

Self-management of Diabetes in the Older Population. 
SIGACCESS Access. Comput., 111: 14–18. 

6.  Tim Althoff, Rok Sosič, Jennifer L. Hicks, Abby C. 

King, Scott L. Delp, and Jure Leskovec. 2017. Large-
scale physical activity data reveal worldwide activity 
inequality. Nature 547, 7663: 336–339. 

7.  Swamy Ananthanarayan and Katie A. Siek. 2012. 

Persuasive wearable technology design for health and 
wellness. In 2012 6th International Conference on 
Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare 
(PervasiveHealth) and Workshops, 236–240. 

8.  Amid Ayobi, Paul Marshall, and Anna L. Cox. 2016. 

Reflections on 5 Years of Personal Informatics: Rising 
Concerns and Emerging Directions. In Proceedings of 
the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’16), 
2774–2781. 

9.  Amid Ayobi, Paul Marshall, Anna L. Cox, and Yunan 
Chen. 2017. Quantifying the Body and Caring for the 
Mind: Self-Tracking in Multiple Sclerosis. In 
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17), 6889–6901. 

10.  Karen Ballard, Karen Lowton, and Jeremy Wright. 
2006. What’s the delay? A qualitative study of 
women’s experiences of reaching a diagnosis of 
endometriosis. Fertility and Sterility 86, 5: 1296–1301. 

11.  Ana Correia de Barros, João Cevada, Àngels Bayés, 

Sheila Alcaine, and Berta Mestre. 2013. User-centred 
Design of a Mobile Self-management Solution for 
Parkinson’s Disease. In Proceedings of the 12th 
International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous 
Multimedia (MUM ’13), 23:1–23:10. 

12.  Mark Beattie, Huiru Zheng, Chris Nugent, and Paul 

McCullagh. 2014. Self-management of COPD: A 
Technology Driven Paradigm. In Proceedings of the 
8th International Conference on Ubiquitous 

Information Management and Communication 
(ICUIMC ’14), 53:1–53:8. 

13.  Christian Becker. 2015. Diagnosis and management of 

endometriosis. Prescriber 26, 20: 17–21. 

14.  David Bernuit, Andreas D. Ebert, Gülden Halis, Anja 
Strothmann, Christoph Gerlinger, Katharina Geppert, 
and Thomas Faustmann. 2011. Female perspectives on 
endometriosis: findings from the uterine bleeding and 
pain women’s research study. Journal of 
Endometriosis 3, 2: 73–85. 

15.  Matthew J. Bietz, Cinnamon S. Bloss, Scout Calvert, 
Job G. Godino, Judith Gregory, Michael P. Claffey, 
Jerry Sheehan, and Kevin Patrick. 2015. Opportunities 
and challenges in the use of personal health data for 
health research. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association: ocv118. 

16.  Brian M. Bot, Christine Suver, Elias Chaibub Neto, 

Michael Kellen, Arno Klein, Christopher Bare, Megan 
Doerr, Abhishek Pratap, John Wilbanks, E. Ray 
Dorsey, Stephen H. Friend, and Andrew D. Trister. 
2016. The mPower study, Parkinson disease mobile 
data collected using ResearchKit. Scientific Data 3: 
160011. 

17.  Julie Brown and Cindy Farquhar. 2014. Endometriosis: 
an overview of Cochrane Reviews. The Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews 3: CD009590. 
18.  Deborah Brunton. 2006. What is Medical History? 

Social History of Medicine 19, 2: 343–343. 
19.  Amanda C de C Williams and Phil H. Richardson. 
1993. What does the BDI measure in chronic pain? 
Pain 55, 2: 259–266. 

20.  Rafael A. Calvo and Dorian Peters. 2013. The Irony 
and Re-interpretation of Our Quantified Self. In 
Proceedings of the 25th Australian Computer-Human 
Interaction Conference: Augmentation, Application, 
Innovation, Collaboration (OzCHI ’13), 367–370. 
21.  Yu-Feng Yvonne Chan, Pei Wang, Linda Rogers, 
Nicole Tignor, Micol Zweig, Steven G. Hershman, 
Nicholas Genes, Erick R. Scott, Eric Krock, Marcus 
Badgeley, Ron Edgar, Samantha Violante, Rosalind 
Wright, Charles A. Powell, Joel T. Dudley, and Eric E. 
Schadt. 2017. The Asthma Mobile Health Study, a 
large-scale clinical observational study using 
ResearchKit. Nature Biotechnology 35, 4: 354–362. 
22.  Jianhong Che, Kristen C. Malecki, Matthew C. Walsh, 

Andrew J. Bersch, Vincent Chan, Christine A. 
McWilliams, and F. Javier Nieto. 2014. Overall 
prescription medication use among adults: findings 
from the Survey of the Health of Wisconsin. WMJ: 
official publication of the State Medical Society of 
Wisconsin 113, 6: 232–237. 

23.  Eun Kyoung Choe, Nicole B. Lee, Bongshin Lee, 

Wanda Pratt, and Julie A. Kientz. 2014. Understanding 
Quantified-selfers’ Practices in Collecting and 
Exploring Personal Data. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’14), 1143–1152. 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 1124.  Shannon M. Christy, Clement K. Gwede, Steven K. 
Sutton, Enmanuel Chavarria, Stacy N. Davis, Rania 
Abdulla, Chitra Ravindra, Ida Schultz, Richard 
Roetzheim, and Cathy D. Meade. 2017. Health 
Literacy among Medically Underserved: The Role of 
Demographic Factors, Social Influence, and Religious 
Beliefs. Journal of Health Communication 22, 11: 
923–931. 

25.  Chia-Fang Chung, Elena Agapie, Jessica Schroeder, 
Sonali Mishra, James Fogarty, and Sean A. Munson. 
2017. When Personal Tracking Becomes Social: 
Examining the Use of Instagram for Healthy Eating. In 
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17), 1674–1687. 
26.  Chia-Fang Chung, Kristin Dew, Allison Cole, Jasmine 
Zia, James Fogarty, Julie A. Kientz, and Sean A. 
Munson. 2016. Boundary Negotiating Artifacts in 
Personal Informatics: Patient-Provider Collaboration 
with Patient-Generated Data. In Proceedings of the 
19th ACM Conference on Computer-Supported 
Cooperative Work & Social Computing (CSCW ’16), 
770–786. 

27.  Jacob Cohen. 1960. A Coefficient of Agreement for 
Nominal Scales. Educational and Psychological 
Measurement 20, 1: 37–46. 

28.  Kay Connelly, Anne Faber, Yvonne Rogers, Katie A. 
Siek, and Tammy Toscos. 2006. Mobile applications 
that empower people to monitor their personal health. e 
& i Elektrotechnik und Informationstechnik 123, 4: 
124–128. 

29.  Lucy-Jane Davis, Stephen S Kennedy, Jane Moore, 
and Andrew Prentice. 2007. Oral contraceptives for 
pain associated with endometriosis. In Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews. John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd. 

30.  Elaine Denny. 2004. Women’s experience of 

endometriosis. Journal of Advanced Nursing 46, 6: 
641–648. 

31.  Elaine Denny. 2009. “I Never Know From One Day to 
Another How I Will Feel”: Pain and Uncertainty in 
Women With Endometriosis. Qualitative Health 
Research 19, 7: 985–995. 

34.  Daniel A. Epstein, An Ping, James Fogarty, and Sean 
A. Munson. 2015. A Lived Informatics Model of 
Personal Informatics. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM 
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and 
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’15), 731–742. 
35.  Daniel Epstein, Felicia Cordeiro, Elizabeth Bales, 

James Fogarty, and Sean Munson. 2014. Taming Data 
Complexity in Lifelogs: Exploring Visual Cuts of 
Personal Informatics Data. In Proceedings of the 2014 
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS 
’14), 667–676. 

36.  Adam Farmer and James Ruffle. 2017. Irritable bowel 
syndrome: enigmatic for doctors, problematic for 
patients. Trends in Urology & Men’s Health 8, 2: 13–
16. 

37.  Jessica Fourquet, Xin Gao, Diego Zavala, Juan C. 

Orengo, Sonia Abac, Abigail Ruiz, Joaquín Laboy, and 
Idhaliz Flores. 2010. Patients’ report on how 
endometriosis affects health, work, and daily life. 
Fertility and Sterility 93, 7: 2424–2428. 

38.  Susannah Fox and Maeve Duggan. 2013. Tracking for 
Health. Pew Research Center: Internet, Science & 
Tech. 

39.  Juan A. Garcia-Velasco and Botros RMB Rizk. 2010. 
Endometriosis: Current Management and Future 
Trends. Boydell & Brewer Ltd. 

40.  Julie A Gazmararian, Mark V Williams, Jennifer Peel, 

and David W Baker. 2003. Health literacy and 
knowledge of chronic disease. Patient Education and 
Counseling 51, 3: 267–275. 

41.  Marie Glasemann, Anne Marie Kanstrup, and Thomas 

Ryberg. 2010. Making Chocolate-covered Broccoli: 
Designing a Mobile Learning Game About Food for 
Young People with Diabetes. In Proceedings of the 8th 
ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems 
(DIS ’10), 262–271. 

42.  Richard W. Grant, Nicole G. Devita, Daniel E. Singer, 

and James B. Meigs. 2003. Polypharmacy and 
Medication Adherence in Patients With Type 2 
Diabetes. Diabetes Care 26, 5: 1408–1412. 

43.  Jennifer C. Greene. 2007. Mixed Methods in Social 

Inquiry. John Wiley & Sons. 

32.  Marketa Dolejsova, Denisa Kera, Cristiano Storni, 

44.  Shannon Greenwood, Andrew Perrin, and Maeve 

Rohit Ashok Khot, Ivan John Clement, Inka Pavelka, 
and Puneet Kishor. 2017. Digital Health & Self-
experimentation: Design Challenges & Provocations. 
In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI EA ’17), 510–517. 

33.  Daniel A. Epstein, Monica Caraway, Chuck Johnston, 
An Ping, James Fogarty, and Sean A. Munson. 2016. 
Beyond Abandonment to Next Steps: Understanding 
and Designing for Life After Personal Informatics Tool 
Use. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16), 
1109–1113. 

Duggan. 2016. Social Media Update 2016. Pew 
Research Center: Internet, Science & Tech. 
45.  Sajal Gupta, Avi Harlev, Ashok Agarwal, Mitali 

Rakhit, Julia Ellis-Kahana, and Sneha Parikh. 2015. 
Management of Endometriosis. In Endometriosis. 
Springer International Publishing, 95–112. 

46.  Kathy K. Hager and Dorothy Brockopp. 2007. Pilot 

project: the chronic pain diary--assessing chronic pain 
in the nursing home population. Journal of 
Gerontological Nursing 33, 9: 14–19. 

47.  Matthew K. Hong, Lauren Wilcox, Daniel Machado, 
Thomas A. Olson, and Stephen F. Simoneaux. 2016. 
Care Partnerships: Toward Technology to Support 
Teens’ Participation in Their Health Care. In 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 12Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16), 5337–5349. 

48.  George Hripcsak and David J Albers. 2013. Next-

generation phenotyping of electronic health records. 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics 
Association : JAMIA 20, 1: 117–121. 

49.  Annette Huntington and Jean A Gilmour. 2005. A life 
shaped by pain: women and endometriosis. Journal of 
Clinical Nursing 14, 9: 1124–1132. 

50.  Ravi Karkar, Jessica Schroeder, Daniel A. Epstein, 

Laura R. Pina, Jeffrey Scofield, James Fogarty, Julie 
A. Kientz, Sean A. Munson, Roger Vilardaga, and 
Jasmine Zia. 2017. TummyTrials: A Feasibility Study 
of Using Self-Experimentation to Detect 
Individualized Food Triggers. In Proceedings of the 
2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’17), 6850–6863. 

51.  Ravi Karkar, Jasmine Zia, Roger Vilardaga, Sonali R. 
Mishra, James Fogarty, Sean A. Munson, and Julie A. 
Kientz. 2015. A framework for self-experimentation in 
personalized health. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association: ocv150. 

52.  Ntwa Katule, Ulrike Rivett, and Melissa Densmore. 
2016. A Family Health App: Engaging Children to 
Manage Wellness of Adults. In Proceedings of the 7th 
Annual Symposium on Computing for Development 
(ACM DEV ’16), 7:1–7:10. 

Formative Evaluation of Two Approaches. In 
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17), 6837–6849. 

59.  Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A Stage-
based Model of Personal Informatics Systems. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’10), 557–566. 

60.  Antonio Loureiro. 2012. Sensing, tracking and 

contextualizing entities in ubiquitous computing. In 
MSWiM ’12 Proceedings of the 15th ACM 
international conference on Modeling, analysis and 
simulation of wireless and mobile systems, 3–4. 
61.  Haley MacLeod, Grace Bastin, Leslie S. Liu, Katie 

Siek, and Kay Connelly. 2017. “Be Grateful You 
Don’t Have a Real Disease”: Understanding Rare 
Disease Relationships. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’17), 1660–1673. 

62.  Haley MacLeod, Kim Oakes, Danika Geisler, Kay 

Connelly, and Katie Siek. 2015. Rare World: Towards 
Technology for Rare Diseases. In Proceedings of the 
33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’15), 1145–1154. 
63.  Haley MacLeod, Anthony Tang, and Sheelagh 

Carpendale. 2013. Personal Informatics in Chronic 
Illness Management. In Proceedings of Graphics 
Interface 2013 (GI ’13), 149–156. 

53.  Christina Kelley, Bongshin Lee, and Lauren Wilcox. 

64.  Haley MacLeod, Shuo Yang, Kim Oakes, Kay 

2017. Self-tracking for Mental Wellness: 
Understanding Expert Perspectives and Student 
Experiences. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’17), 629–641. 

54.  Vera Khovanskaya, Eric P.S. Baumer, Dan Cosley, 

Stephen Voida, and Geri Gay. 2013. “Everybody 
Knows What You’Re Doing”: A Critical Design 
Approach to Personal Informatics. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’13), 3403–3412. 

55.  Harry Kotses, I. Leonard Bernstein, David I. Bernstein, 
Russ V. C. Reynolds, Leslie Korbee, Joan K. Wigal, 
Ellen Ganson, Cindy Stout, and Thomas L. Creer. 
1995. A self-management program for adult asthma. 
Part I: Development and evaluation. Journal of Allergy 
and Clinical Immunology 95, 2: 529–540. 

56.  P.-M. Lam and N. Raine-Fenning. 2009. Polycystic 
ovarian syndrome: a misnomer for an enigmatic 
disease. Ultrasound in Obstetrics and Gynecology 33, 
6: 621–627. 

57.  Jisoo Lee. 2013. Supporting Self-experimentation of 

Behavior Change Strategies. In Proceedings of the 
2013 ACM Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous 
Computing Adjunct Publication (UbiComp ’13 
Adjunct), 361–366. 

58.  Jisoo Lee, Erin Walker, Winslow Burleson, Matthew 
Kay, Matthew Buman, and Eric B. Hekler. 2017. Self-
Experimentation for Behavior Change: Design and 

Connelly, and Sriramm Natarajan. 2016. Identifying 
Rare Diseases from Behavioural Data: A Machine 
Learning Approach. In 2016 IEEE First International 
Conference on Connected Health: Applications, 
Systems and Engineering Technologies (CHASE), 
130–139. 

65.  Lena Mamykina, Elizabeth M. Heitkemper, Arlene M. 
Smaldone, Rita Kukafka, Heather Cole-Lewis, Patricia 
G. Davidson, Elizabeth D. Mynatt, Jonathan N. Tobin, 
Andrea Cassells, Carrie Goodman, and George 
Hripcsak. 2016. Structured scaffolding for reflection 
and problem solving in diabetes self-management: 
qualitative study of mobile diabetes detective. Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association: 
JAMIA 23, 1: 129–136. 

66.  Lena Mamykina, Elizabeth M. Heitkemper, Arlene M. 
Smaldone, Rita Kukafka, Heather J. Cole-Lewis, 
Patricia G. Davidson, Elizabeth D. Mynatt, Andrea 
Cassells, Jonathan N. Tobin, and George Hripcsak. 
2017. Personal discovery in diabetes self-management: 
Discovering cause and effect using self-monitoring 
data. Journal of Biomedical Informatics 76: 1–8. 
67.  Lena Mamykina, Matthew E. Levine, Patricia G. 

Davidson, Arlene M. Smaldone, Noemie Elhadad, and 
David J. Albers. 2016. Data-driven health 
management: reasoning about personally generated 
data in diabetes with information technologies. Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association 23, 
3: 526–531. 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 1368.  Lena Mamykina, Matthew E. Levine, Patricia G. 

Davidson, Arlene M. Smaldone, Noemie Elhadad, and 
David J. Albers. 2017. From Personal Informatics to 
Personal Analytics: Investigating How Clinicians and 
Patients Reason About Personal Data Generated with 
Self-Monitoring in Diabetes. In Cognitive Informatics 
in Health and Biomedicine. Springer, Cham, 301–313. 

69.  Lena Mamykina, Elizabeth D. Mynatt, and David R. 

Kaufman. 2006. Investigating Health Management 
Practices of Individuals with Diabetes. In Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’06), 927–936. 

70.  Mollie McKillop, Natalie Voigt, Rebecca Schnall, and 

Noémie Elhadad. 2016. Exploring Self-Tracking as a 
Participatory Research Activity Among Women with 
Endometriosis. Journal of Participatory Medicine. 

71.  Róisín McNaney, Mohammad Othman, Dan 

Richardson, Paul Dunphy, Telmo Amaral, Nick Miller, 
Helen Stringer, Patrick Olivier, and John Vines. 2016. 
Speeching: Mobile Crowdsourced Speech Assessment 
to Support Self-Monitoring and Management for 
People with Parkinson’s. In Proceedings of the 2016 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’16), 4464–4476. 

72.  Roisin McNaney, Ivan Poliakov, John Vines, Madeline 
Balaam, Pengfei Zhang, and Patrick Olivier. 2015. 
LApp: A Speech Loudness Application for People with 
Parkinson’s on Google Glass. In Proceedings of the 
33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’15), 497–500. 

73.  Helena M. Mentis, Jarmo Laaksolahti, and Kristina 

Höök. 2014. My Self and You: Tension in Bodily 
Sharing of Experience. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum. 
Interact. 21, 4: 20:1–20:26. 

74.  Noel Morgan and Sarah Richardson. 2016. Changing 
perspectives on the progression of type 1 diabetes. 
Open Research Exeter. 

75.  Mattijn Morren, Sandra van Dulmen, Jessika 

Ouwerkerk, and Jozien Bensing. 2009. Compliance 
with momentary pain measurement using electronic 
diaries: A systematic review. European Journal of 
Pain 13, 4: 354–365. 

76.  Hanyia Naqvi, Ramanaiah Mamillapalli, Graciela 
Krikun, and Hugh S. Taylor. 2016. Endometriosis 
Located Proximal to or Remote From the Uterus 
Differentially Affects Uterine Gene Expression. 
Reproductive Sciences 23, 2: 186–191. 
77.  Francisco Nunes. 2015. Designing Self-care 

Technologies for Everyday Life: A Practice Approach. 
In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI EA ’15), 215–218. 

78.  Rita Orji, Lennart E. Nacke, and Chrysanne Di Marco. 

79.  Tamar Pincus and Amanda Williams. 1999. Models 
and measurements of depression in chronic pain. 
Journal of Psychosomatic Research 47, 3: 211–219. 
80.  Davy Preuveneers and Yolande Berbers. 2008. Mobile 
Phones Assisting with Health Self-care: A Diabetes 
Case Study. In Proceedings of the 10th International 
Conference on Human Computer Interaction with 
Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI ’08), 177–
186. 

81.  Aare Puussaar, Adrian Clear, and Peter Wright. 2017. 
Enhancing Personal Informatics Through Social 
Sensemaking. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
6936–6942. 

82.  Ruth Ravichandran, Sang-Wha Sien, Shwetak N. Patel, 
Julie A. Kientz, and Laura R. Pina. 2017. Making 
Sense of Sleep Sensors: How Sleep Sensing 
Technologies Support and Undermine Sleep Health. In 
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17), 6864–6875. 

83.  Rachel L. Richesson, W. Ed Hammond, Meredith 

Nahm, Douglas Wixted, Gregory E. Simon, Jennifer 
G. Robinson, Alan E. Bauck, Denise Cifelli, Michelle 
M. Smerek, John Dickerson, Reesa L. Laws, Rosemary 
A. Madigan, Shelley A. Rusincovitch, Cynthia 
Kluchar, and Robert M. Califf. 2013. Electronic health 
records based phenotyping in next-generation clinical 
trials: a perspective from the NIH Health Care Systems 
Collaboratory. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association 20, e2: e226–e231. 
84.  Herman Saksono and Andrea G. Parker. 2017. 

Reflective Informatics Through Family Storytelling: 
Self-discovering Physical Activity Predictors. In 
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17), 5232–5244. 
85.  Jessica Schroeder, Jane Hoffswell, Chia-Fang Chung, 
James Fogarty, Sean Munson, and Jasmine Zia. 2017. 
Supporting Patient-Provider Collaboration to Identify 
Individual Triggers using Food and Symptom Journals. 
CSCW: proceedings of the Conference on Computer-
Supported Cooperative Work. Conference on 
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work 2017: 1726–
1739. 

86.  Manish A. Shah and Jaffer A. Ajani. 2010. Gastric 

Cancer—An Enigmatic and Heterogeneous Disease. 
JAMA 303, 17: 1753–1754. 

87.  Chaitanya Shivade, Preethi Raghavan, Eric Fosler-

Lussier, Peter J. Embi, Noemie Elhadad, Stephen B. 
Johnson, and Albert M. Lai. 2014. A review of 
approaches to identifying patient phenotype cohorts 
using electronic health records. Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association 21, 2: 221–
230. 

2017. Towards Personality-driven Persuasive Health 
Games and Gamified Systems. In Proceedings of the 
2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’17), 1015–1027. 

88.  Christine Sinsky, Lacey Colligan, Ling Li, Mirela 

Prgomet, Sam Reynolds, Lindsey Goeders, Johanna 
Westbrook, Michael Tutty, and George Blike. 2016. 
Allocation of Physician Time in Ambulatory Practice: 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 14A Time and Motion Study in 4 Specialties. Annals of 
Internal Medicine 165, 11: 753. 

89.  Richard Smith. 2002. In search of “non-disease.” 

BMJ : British Medical Journal 324, 7342: 883–885. 

90.  Ahmed M. Soliman, Karin S. Coyne, Erica Zaiser, 
Jane Castelli-Haley, and Mahesh J. Fuldeore. 2017. 
The burden of endometriosis symptoms on health-
related quality of life in women in the United States: a 
cross-sectional study. Journal of Psychosomatic 
Obstetrics & Gynecology: 1–11. 

91.  Cristiano Storni. 2014. Diabetes self-care in-the-wild: 
Design challenges for personal health record systems 
and self-monitoring technologies. Information 
Technology & People 27, 4: 397–420. 

92.  Andrew Su, Wendy Shih, Angela P. Presson, and Lin 
Chang. 2014. Characterization of Symptoms in 
Irritable Bowel Syndrome with Mixed Bowel Habit 
Pattern. Neurogastroenterology and motility : the 
official journal of the European Gastrointestinal 
Motility Society 26, 1. 

93.  Charles Teddlie and Abbas Tashakkori. 2009. 

Foundations of Mixed Methods Research: Integrating 
Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches in the Social 
and Behavioral Sciences. SAGE. 

94.  Sen-Wen Teng, Huann-Cheng Horng, Chi-Hong Ho, 
Ming-Shyen Yen, Hsiang-Tai Chao, Peng-Hui Wang, 
and Taiwan Association of Gynecology Systematic 
Review Group. 2016. Women with endometriosis have 
higher comorbidities: Analysis of domestic data in 
Taiwan. Journal of the Chinese Medical Association: 
JCMA 79, 11: 577–582. 

95.  P. Vercellini, L. Fedele, G. Aimi, G. Pietropaolo, D. 
Consonni, and P. G. Crosignani. 2007. Association 
between endometriosis stage, lesion type, patient 
characteristics and severity of pelvic pain symptoms: a 
multivariate analysis of over 1000 patients. Human 
Reproduction 22, 1: 266–271. 

96.  Sandra Vosbergen, Ersen B. Colkesen, Joyca Lacroix, 
Georgio Mosis, Pieter Jan Stappers, Roderik A. 
Kraaijenhagen, and Niels Peek. 2010. Assessment of 
User Needs for Self-management Services in Coronary 
Heart Disease: A Designerly Approach. In 
Proceedings of the 28th Annual European Conference 
on Cognitive Ergonomics (ECCE ’10), 343–344. 
97.  Brian W. Ward, Jeannine S. Schiller, and Richard A. 

Goodman. 2014. Multiple Chronic Conditions Among 
US Adults: A 2012 Update. Preventing Chronic 
Disease 11. 

98.  Griffin M. Weber, Kenneth D. Mandl, and Isaac S. 

Kohane. 2014. Finding the Missing Link for Big 
Biomedical Data. JAMA 311, 24: 2479–2480. 

99.  Emma Whelan. 2007. “No one agrees except for those 
of us who have it”: endometriosis patients as an 
epistemological community. Sociology of Health & 
Illness 29, 7: 957–982. 

100. Naomi Yamashita, Hideaki Kuzuoka, Keiji Hirata, 

Takashi Kudo, Eiji Aramaki, and Kazuki Hattori. 
2017. Changing Moods: How Manual Tracking by 
Family Caregivers Improves Caring and Family 
Communication. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’17), 158–169. 

101. Kate Young, Jane Fisher, and Maggie Kirkman. 2015. 
Women’s experiences of endometriosis: a systematic 
review and synthesis of qualitative research. The 
Journal of Family Planning and Reproductive Health 
Care 41, 3: 225–234. 

102. Beatrix Zechmann, Jan Bobeth, and Manfred 

Tscheligi. 2016. Towards Successful Self-management 
and Empowerment for COPD Patients. In Proceedings 
of the 18th International Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices and 
Services Adjunct (MobileHCI ’16), 1101–1104. 
103. David Zeevi, Tal Korem, Niv Zmora, David Israeli, 

Daphna Rothschild, Adina Weinberger, Orly Ben-
Yacov, Dar Lador, Tali Avnit-Sagi, Maya Lotan-
Pompan, Jotham Suez, Jemal Ali Mahdi, Elad Matot, 
Gal Malka, Noa Kosower, Michal Rein, Gili 
Zilberman-Schapira, Lenka Dohnalová, Meirav 
Pevsner-Fischer, Rony Bikovsky, Zamir Halpern, Eran 
Elinav, and Eran Segal. 2015. Personalized Nutrition 
by Prediction of Glycemic Responses. Cell 163, 5: 
1079–1094. 

104. Martin Zens, Peter Woias, Norbert P Suedkamp, and 
Philipp Niemeyer. 2017. “Back on Track”: A Mobile 
App Observational Study Using Apple’s ResearchKit 
Framework. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 5, 2. 

105. Jasmine Zia, Jessica Schroeder, Sean Munson, James 
Fogarty, Linda Nguyen, Pamela Barney, Margaret 
Heitkemper, and Uri Ladabaum. 2016. Feasibility and 
Usability Pilot Study of a Novel Irritable Bowel 
Syndrome Food and Gastrointestinal Symptom Journal 
Smartphone App. Clinical and Translational 
Gastroenterology 7, 3: e147. 

106. FAQs About Rare Diseases | Genetic and Rare 

Diseases Information Center (GARD) – an NCATS 
Program. Retrieved December 18, 2017 from 
https://rarediseases.info.nih.gov/diseases/pages/31/faqs
-about-rare-diseases 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 565Page 15 
 
 
 
 
