Entangled with Numbers: Quantified Self  
and Others in a Team-Based Online Game  

YUBO KOU, Florida State University, USA 
XINNING GUI, University of California, Irvine, USA 

Quantification  is  a  process  that  produces  and  communicates  numbers,  imbued  with  the  expectation  of 
generating  knowledge  and  optimizing  human  behavior  and  social  process.  In  this  paper,  we  explore  how 
quantification  mediates  virtual  teamwork  through  an  ethnographic  study  of  quantification  in  League  of 
Legends, a popular team-based  online game with a highly competitive  culture. In the game, rich statistics 
about  each  individual  player’s  gaming  history  and  performance  are  publicly  available,  analyzed  and 
displayed  on  numerous  third-party  sites.  We  describe  how  players  were  entangled  with  numbers.  They 
derived knowledge from numbers but struggled with proper ways of interpretation. They utilized numbers 
to quantify teammates and opponents, but in-game tensions and conflicts easily ensued. They noticed how 
quantification became burdensome and stressed the importance of proper use. We discuss how this case of 
quantified  self  and  others  manifests  complex  relationships  between  self-knowledge,  numerical  authority, 
and virtual teamwork.1  

CCS Concepts: • Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction; Empirical studies in HCI 

KEYWORDS 
Quantification,  quantified  self,  quantified  others,  self-knowledge,  numerical  authority,  interpretive 
flexibility, communicative trust, virtual team, League of Legends, multiplayer online battle arena, MOBA 

ACM Reference format: 
Yubo Kou and Xinning Gui. 2018. Entangled with Numbers: Quantified Self and Others in a Team-Based Online Game.. In 
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, CSCW, Article 93 (November 2018). ACM, New York, NY. 
25 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3274362 

1  INTRODUCTION 
Different  from  collocated  collaboration,  in  virtual  teams,  geographically  distributed  team 
members  often  face  social  challenges  developing  mutual  trust  and  shared  understanding  [60]. 
Computer-supported  cooperative  work  (CSCW)  research  has  explored  ways  of  conceptualizing 
and designing to support critical social elements in virtual collaboration, such as awareness [20] 
and  social  translucence  [24].  As  a  way  of  enhancing  social  awareness,  considerable  work  has 
discussed  how  means  of  representation  such  as  a  virtual  profile  might  facilitate  virtual 
collaboration  [20,32,68].  Joining  this  stream  of  research,  this  paper  analyzes  how  numerical 
representations of  people,  produced via quantification,  impact  virtual  teamwork.  Quantification 
in this paper refers to the general social phenomenon of producing and communicating numbers 
[26]. 

93 

Author’s addresses: Y. Kou, Florida State University, 142 Collegiate Loop, Tallahassee, FL 32304 email: ykou@fsu.edu; X. Gui, University of 
California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92617 email: guix@uci.edu. 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for  personal  or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that 
copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. 
Copyrights  for  components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To 
copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior  specific  permission  and/or  a  fee.  Request 
permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  
2573-0142/2018/November - 93 $15.00 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.    https://doi.org/10.1145/3274362 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
                                                                 
93:2 

  Y. Kou & X. Gui 

Quantification has become a prevalent practice, as increasingly more  computing systems are 
made available to generate and analyze numbers about many aspects of a person’s work and life. 
Famously, the Quantified Self movement denotes a trend to use technology to acquire data about 
manifold aspects of people’s daily life. The movement, manifested in the self-tracking of health-
related aspects such as eating [13] and footsteps [31], has received lots of attention from HCI and 
CSCW researchers.  Other  studies  have examined academic scholars’ self-quantification through 
numbers  of  publications  and  citations  [33,34,36].  However,  quantification  has  been  examined 
primarily as individuals’ acts with a focus on developing self-knowledge. Little attention has been 
paid  to  how  quantification  structures  the  relationship  between  people  and  numbers  in  virtual 
teams. 

We study quantification in virtual teams in League of Legends (LoL), currently one of the most 
popular  multiplayer  online  games  in  the  world  with  more  than  100  million  monthly  active 
players  [76].  LoL’s  API  supports  numerous  third-party  websites  to  obtain  rich  data  about  and 
establish  profiles  for  every  single  player.  Players  can  use  these  quantification  tools  to  closely 
monitor  their  own  as  well  as  their  teammates’  numerous  gameplay  aspects  such  as  gaming 
history  and  in-game  performance.  Drawing  from  an  ethnographic  study  including  participant 
observation, collection and analysis of player online discussion, and semi-structured interviews, 
we  describe  how  players  quantified  themselves  and  others  in  the  context  of  virtual  teamwork. 
Quantification  has  become  an  integral  gameplay  component  as  players  ascribed  authority  to 
performance-based numbers  and constantly performed evaluations of self and others.  However, 
the  interpretation  of  numbers  was  inherently  flexible,  relying  heavily  upon  players’  situated 
knowledge of the game and the community. Quantification also intensified virtual teamwork as 
players  frequently  quantified  and  passed  judgments  on  others,  including  teammates  and 
opponents. Players also experienced stress and anxiety associated with their perceived misuse of 
quantification.  Based  on  these  findings  we  discuss  the  complex  relationship  between 
quantification, self-knowledge, and virtual teamwork. 

Our contributions to the CSCW literature are three-fold: First, we deepen the understanding of 
quantification by describing a highly developed culture of quantification in a community where 
all the members’ data has been public available, calculated, and analyzed across multiple years; 
Second, we contribute to studies of virtual teams by discussing the use of quantification in virtual 
teamwork; Third, we analyze how quantification mediates collaborative play in online gaming. 

2 BACKGROUND 
League  of  Legends  (LoL)  is  a  multiplayer  online  battle  arena  (MOBA)  game  developed  by  Riot 
Games located in Santa Monica, California, United States. It is currently one of the most played 
games  in  the  world  with  reportedly  100  million  monthly  players  around  the  world  [64].  Its 
annual eSports  World Championship hosted by  Riot Games attracted 60 million people in  2017 
[50]. 

LoL’s core gameplay style is to arrange a five-versus-five match. Prior to the start of a match, 
each team of five players would first enter the “Champion Select Lobby,” where they meet each 
other for the first time, discuss later gameplay strategies, and select a champion out of more than 
130  available  champions  in  LoL.  A  typical  match  lasts  between  20  minutes  to  50  minutes.  Two 
teams  are  generated  from  a  large  pool  of  available  players  based  on  their  skill,  measured  by 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

Entangled with Numbers: Quantified Self and Others in a Team-Based Online Game    

93:3 

matchmaking  rating  (MMR),  so  as  to  create  a  balanced  match2.  Given  the  massive  player  base, 
players assembled into a team rarely know their teammates, and must cooperate with the other 
four strangers within a short time. An exception is that a player can “duo” with one friend, but 
the rest three teammates are strangers. Previous work on LoL has found that these pickup groups, 
or temporary teams, face enormous challenges in creating smooth cooperation, and conflicts and 
tensions could easily erupt [43,48,71]. 

While MMR is what Riot Games considers as the true skill rating of a player, it is not visible to 
players.  LoL  has  two  game  modes:  normal  and  ranked.  In  this  paper,  we  focus  on  players 
practices related to the ranked mode. Only in the ranked mode does LoL use a league system to 
rank and represent players’ skill level. This skill representation is visible to players. The league 
system  consists  of  seven  leagues,  including  Bronze  (22.06%  of  all  the  players),  Silver  (49.54%), 
Gold (19.69%), Platinum (7.18%), Diamond (1.43%), Master (0.05%), and Challenger (0.02%)3. Each 
of  the  first  five  leagues  also  contains  five  divisions,  each  of  which  has  100  league  points  (LP). 
Players accumulate or lose LP by winning or losing matches. Upon reaching 100 LP in a division, 
the player enters a promotion series of several matches that determines whether the player can 
be promoted to the next division. Players can be demoted to a lower division if they reach 0 LP. 

Through  the past  few years, the LoL game  client had  intermittent support for  the display  of 
player  performance-based  data.  In  Patch  8.15  released  in July  2018,  the  LoL  client  added  a  new 
feature  named  “stats”  displaying  a  wide  range  of  performance-based  data.  By  the  time  of  this 
study, players have relied upon third-party quantification tools that collect and analyze data from 
LoL’s  API  to  gauge  player  performance.  LoL  players  use  these  tools  to  monitor  their  own 
gameplay history [46] and inform their collaboration with teammates [44]. 

Players  can  encounter  discussions  or  recommendations  of  these  apps  in  player  online 
communities and websites related to the game, such as LoL eSports teams’ official websites. For 
instance,  in  a  blog  published  on  the  website  of  the  eSports  team  dignitas4,  more  than  80  tools 
were  listed  and  analyzed.  The  first  tool,  for  example,  is  described  as  “Mobalytics  -  A  personal 
performance analytics tool for League of Legends that gives detailed visualized data on all aspects 
of your play.”  

Figure  1  is  a  screenshot  of  one  of  the  most  common  tools  (http://op.gg)  that  players  use  to 
learn  about  their  and  their  teammates’  performance.  As  shown  in  Figure  1,  for  each  single 
champion that a player has played, the statistics include the number of matched played with the 
champion, win rate of each champion, kill/death/assist ratio (KDA), average gold, average creep 
score  (CS),  an  MMR  score  predicted  by  the  tools,  and  so  forth.  Besides  the  information  in  this 
screenshot,  op.gg  is  highly  developed  with  numerous  tabs  leading  to  a  wealth  of  information 
regarding  different  aspects  of  a  player’s  current  and  past  performance,  such  as  win  rate  in  the 
past seven days and top played champions.  

2 Official Explanation from Riot Games at: https://nexus.leagueoflegends.com/en-us/2018/02/dev-matchmaking-real-talk/ 
3 Percentages collected on March 2, 2018 from http://na.op.gg/statistics/tier/ 
4 http://team-dignitas.net/articles/blogs/League-of-Legends/9966/a-complete-list-of-league-of-legends-tools-sites-to-improve-your-game 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
                                                                 
93:4 

  Y. Kou & X. Gui 

Figure 1. Screenshot of the first author’s gameplay profile on op.gg (taken on September 15, 2018). 
1) Player ranks in the past several seasons in 2014, 2016, and 2017. 2) Player ranks in each month 
from October 2017 to September 2018. 3) Tabs for gameplay data from season 1 in 2011 to season 8 
in 2018. 4) A partial list of all the champions played in season 8 and rich gameplay statistics. 

3 RELATED WORK 

3.1 Knowing through Quantification 
Quantification  is  a  “constitutive  feature  of  modern  science  and  social  organization”  [26].  It 
prevails  in  increasingly  more  aspects  of  our  contemporary  society  such  as  manufacture, 
education,  politics,  economics,  and  health.  It  can  also  be  viewed  as  a  form  of  “technique”  in 
Jacques Ellul’s term that is “rationally arrived at and having absolute efficiency (for a given stage 
of development) in every field of human activity” [23]. 

Particularly, self-quantification as a technique  to develop  knowledge about the self has been 
often  traced  back  to  Foucault’s  writings  on  the  ethics  of  care  of  the  self  [53].  For  Foucault, 
individuals should constantly engage in a moral and ethical project to achieve happiness, wisdom, 
health, and wellbeing [27]. When Foucault conceived the idea of self-knowledge and care of the 
self [27], he pointed to individuals’ agency in developing knowledge about themselves against the 
backdrop of the prevalence of power relations. Foucault further discussed technologies of the self 
through  which  individuals  could develop self-knowledge,  such  as self-examination with  respect 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
Entangled with Numbers: Quantified Self and Others in a Team-Based Online Game    

93:5 

to thoughts in correspondence to reality, the way our thoughts related to rules, and the relation 
between the hidden thought and an inner impurity [28]. Building upon the idea of technologies 
of the self, researchers have explored how digital technologies could become a technology of the 
self as people exert their agency in discovering and transforming their selves [41,52].  

In  personal  informatics,  one  primary  application  field  of  the  practices  of  self-quantification, 
individuals  collect,  analyze,  and  reflect  upon  many  types  of  personal  information  such  as  bank 
statements,  email  history,  and  health  information  [49].  Particularly  in  self-tracking,  individuals 
start  to  quantify  and  monitor  themselves  for  many  reasons  such  as  better  health  condition, 
physical or mental performance, new stimuli, or socializing [12,53]. 

But numerical representation, the output of quantification, has long been cited for issues such 
as  a  reductionist  approach  [65,66],  removal  of  contextual  information  [21],  and  complex 
psychological  processes  related  to  interpretation  of  the  data  [11].  Ultimately,  quantification 
entails categorization and involves qualitative judgment [10,14,63], demanding closer attention to 
the entanglement between quantification and the values beneath design decisions [7]. 

Inspired  by  John  Langshaw  Austin  who  analyzed  words  as  deeds  [3],  Espeland  and  Stevens 
suggested  that  numbers  should  be  regarded  as  deeds  as  well  [26]. According  to  them,  numbers 
are acts of  communication whose meanings and functions depend deeply  upon ‘grammars’ and 
‘vocabularies’  developed  over  time  through  use,  and  should  not  be  reduced  to  a  narrow 
instrumentality  [26].  They  proposed  one  important  distinction  between  forms  of  quantification 
which is those that mark and those that commensurate. Numbers that mark are used to identify 
entities,  such  as  numbers  on  a  license  plate.  Numbers  that  commensurate  are  to  evaluate  or 
measure different objects with a common metric [25]. For Espeland and Stevens, commensuration 
is a process that creates a specific relationship among objects by transforming all difference into 
quantity, thus requiring considerable social and intellectual investment [25]. Measures can thus 
influence  and  discipline  people,  or  shape  and  reinforce  existing  categories  [26].  Therefore, 
quantification  can  have  multiple  meanings  and  purposes  across  contexts.  To  understand  a 
specific form of quantification, we shall study the context through which numbers are generated, 
sorted, and interpreted through numeracy and broadly shared methodological standards. 

3.2 Trust and Collaborative Traces in Virtual Teamwork 
Understanding  challenges  and  design  opportunities  for  supporting  virtual  teams  has  been  a 
primary research strand in both CSCW and organizational studies for a long time. An important 
foundational element for successful virtual teamwork is trust. Tseng and Fogg considered trust as 
“a positive belief about the perceived reliability of, dependability of, and confidence in a person, 
object,  or  process”  [75].  In  virtual  teams,  members  may  not  have  a  history  of  interpersonal 
interactions  and  communication  through  which  trust  is  developed  in  collocated  collaboration. 
Thus  organizational  and  management  research  has  explores  many  facets  of  trust  formation  in 
virtual  teams,  such  as  managers’  and  leaders’  strategic  actions  [30],  goal  setting  [35],  the 
interplay between the cognitive and affective dimensions [40], functional diversity [62], and the 
relationship between monitoring and trust [18,67]. 

To  foster  trust  in  virtual  teamwork,  a  rising  body  of  CSCW  research,  often  focused  on  the 
setting  of  global  software  development,  has  turned  to  mechanisms  that  support  teammates  to 
follow  and monitor  one another’s  work status  and history. For  example, Froehlich  and Dourish 
implemented a visualization  system that provided a view  of  the dynamic software process, and 
reported  that  this  system  providers  developers  meaningful  information  and  context  of 
development process [29]. Marlow et al.’s qualitative investigation of GitHub, an online software 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
93:6 

  Y. Kou & X. Gui 

development  community,  reported  that  activity  traces  such  as  history  across  development 
projects could inform how people assess expertise and shape social interactions [55]. Regarding 
these various mechanisms, Trainer et al. discussed the notion of “collaborative traces” [74], which 
refer to representations of the past and current activity of a group of virtual teammates. Trainer 
et  al.  showed  that  tools  that  adopt  collaborative  traces  could  support  the  development  of  trust 
[74].  Similar  to  the  idea  of  collaborative  traces,  quantification  tools  in  LoL  used  a  rich  set  of 
numbers to show teammates’ past and current gaming activities. In this paper, we examine how 
collaborative traces intersected with LoL players’ trust in their virtual collaboration. 

3.3 Participatory Surveillance in Online Games 
As  players  use  quantification  tools  to  monitor  both  their  and  their  teammates’  performance, 
quantitative  measures  support  simplifying,  classifying,  comparing,  and  evaluating,  the  core 
means of disciplinary power [69]. Particularly, LoL can be analyzed from the lens of “surveillance 
games,” which Albrechtslund and Dubbeld defined as ones “that use data processing technologies 
to  provide  or  enhance  entertainment,  thereby  appropriating  surveillance  devices  for  their  own 
hedonistic purposes” [2]. Later Albrechtslund proposed the notion of participatory surveillance [1] 
to  argue  for  the  social  and  playful  aspects  of  surveillance,  which  has  been  less  discussed  in 
previous surveillance literature that focuses primarily upon the negative and repressive aspect of 
surveillance. 

However,  video  games  are  not  just  for  play,  entertainment,  and  relaxation.  Yee  noted  that 
video  games  blur  the  boundaries  of  work  and  play  as  online  games  players  invest  lots  of  time 
(average  20  hours  a  week),  perform  “an  assortment  of  clerical  tasks,  logistical  planning  and 
management,” the very  same  thing they do in their offices [80]. Extensive video game research 
has reported how  players carried out systematic and carefully planned efforts in order to make 
progressions  and  achievements  [4,44,57,72].  Video  game  research  in  the  CSCW  literature  has 
developed a deep understanding of video game play as a form of collaborative work [37,58,59]. 

Putting  together  the  idea  of  participatory,  playful  surveillance  and  that  of  the  blurring 
boundary of work and play, we observe a tension between the pleasurable and the serious, work-
like  framings  of  monitoring  self  and  teammates.  Stressing  the  importance  of  willingness  to 
participate  in  surveillance,  Whitson  noted  that  “the  moment  you  understand  that  you  are 
working,  you  are  not  playing…  But  for  it  to  be  experienced  as  play,  everyone  needs  to  be  a 
willing participant” [79]. LoL players cannot be considered as “willing participants,” as the game 
company, Riot Games, owns and decides to make available players’ data. In this regard, our paper 
contributes to a deeper understanding of the relationship between work and play in the context 
of surveillance practice. 

4  METHODS 
This  paper  is  based  upon  a  multi-year  ethnographic  study  of  League  of  Legends  from  October 
2011 to the time of this study. The ethnographic project was initiated with a general purpose of 
understanding players’ social experiences within the game community. The project has gradually 
developed into two distinct but related strands including governance [45] and player experience 
[43,44].  This  paper  belongs  to  the  second  strand.  The  first  author  conducted  participant 
observation  in  the  game’s  North  American  server  as  well  as  numerous  related  online  venues, 
following the idea of multi-sited ethnography [54]. The first author played between 700 to 1000 
ranked or normal matches per year since 2011 (except the year of 2015), ranked at Platinum by 
the time of this study, and participated in and observed player discussions in LoL-focused online 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

Entangled with Numbers: Quantified Self and Others in a Team-Based Online Game    

93:7 

forums  hosted  on  Riot  Games’  server  as  well  as  general  social  media  sites  such  as  Reddit.  The 
first author also frequented  video-based social media platforms such  as YouTube and Twitch, a 
living  streaming  site,  which  were  frequently  discussed  among  players  as  primary  venues  for 
watching and learning from the gameplay of professional eSports or highly skilled players. The 
first author obtained knowledge of these quantification tools through this long-term engagement 
in  the  game,  and  frequently  used  these  tools  to  inform  his  own  play.  Extensive  fieldnotes  and 
screenshots were taken regarding numerous aspects of social life and player experience with the 
game through participant observation. 

The project was not about quantification from the very beginning. While doing ethnographic 
work,  the  first  author  also  conducted  two  rounds  of  interviews  prior  to  this  study  of 
quantification.  The  first  round  was  conducted  in  2012  and  2013  with  a  focus  on  how  player 
perceived  collaboration  in LoL. The second round was  conducted  in 2014 and 2015, concerning 
how  players  learned  and  improved  their  ranks  in  game.  Both  served  as  individual  research 
projects. It is important to note that the first two rounds prior to this study did not have a focus 
on quantification. However,  the opening questions  such  as how you improved your  skill in the 
game  often  encouraged  players  to  talk  about  their  experiences  with  numerous  quantification 
tools that they had used, with op.gg being the latest and most frequently cited among the study 
participants.  The  first  two  rounds  of  interviews,  as  well  as  the  first  author’s  own  experience, 
inspired this study to investigate how LoL players used quantification in their play.  

The latest round of interview was conducted in February and March 2018, with a focus on the 
use of quantification tools in gameplay. During this round, we conducted semi-structured, open-
ended interviews with 22 LoL players with diverse ranks distributed across Bronze, Silver, Gold, 
Platinum, and Diamond. They all reported playing for at least one year and being familiar with 
one  or  more  quantification  tools.  The  interviews  were  started  with  the  following  open-ended 
questions:  1)  can  you  talk  about  when  you  started  playing  the  game?  2)  how  do  you  improve 
your skill in the game? 3) how did you come to know the existence of the quantification tools? 4) 
when  do  you  use  these  tools?  5)  how  do  these  tools  influence  your  gameplay?  6)  how  do  you 
know other players use these tools? 

The interviews were conducted either through in-game messaging function, email, or skype in 
English,  and  lasted  between  20  and  40  minutes.  We  manually  transcribed  these  interviews  for 
interviews  where  players  mentioned  their  use  of 
later  analysis.  Combining  previous 
quantification tools, and the latest round of 22 interviews focused on these tools, we had a total 
number  of  68  interview  transcripts.  A  substantial  portion  of  the  68  interviews  mentioned 
quantification.  However,  when  reporting  data  in  this  paper,  we  draw  primarily  from  the  latest 
round of 22 interviews, as well as one from an interview conducted in 2015, because of their data 
richness  and  topical  relevance.  Due  to  the  limit  of  space,  Table  1  only  introduces  the 
demographic information of 23 participants whose interviews were actually used in this paper. 

We  used  thematic  analysis  [6]  to  analyze  our  data  in  an  inductive  approach  [61]  to  identify 
themes that are strongly linked to the data themselves. The dataset for analysis included all the 
68  interview  transcripts,  as  well  as  forum  discussions,  fieldnotes,  screenshots  taken  in  the  past 
few  years.  Two  researchers  (including  the  first  author)  familiar  with  LoL  participated  in  this 
analysis process. We first familiarized ourselves with data with the initial analytic interests in the 
role of quantification in supporting gameplay. Each researcher immersed himself or herself in the 
data  through  reading  back  and  forth  and  marking  ideas.  During  this  iterative  process,  the  two 
researchers  had  regular  meetings  on  a  daily  basis  to  discuss  ideas.  Each  of  us  then  started 
generating an individual list of initial codes through our whole dataset, after which we compared 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
93:8 

  Y. Kou & X. Gui 

and combined our initial code lists through discussion. Following the suggestion of coding for as 
many  potential  themes  as  possible  [6],  we  generated  over  290  codes.  An  example  is  the  data 
extract “Looking at op.gg is good if you use it correctly” which was coded for “positive review of 
quantification” and “knowledge about how to use.” After generating the initial code list, we re-
focused  our  analysis  at  the  broader  level  of  themes,  using  rounds  of  discussions  to  consolidate 
our codes into an overarching theme. During this process, we also went back and forth between 
the  generated  themes  and  the  dataset  to  refine  the  themes,  with  the  goal  of  ensuring  internal 
homogeneity and external heterogeneity [61]. Our final satisfactory thematic map includes three 
primary  themes:  how  players  developed  knowledge  through  their  situated  interpretation  of 
numbers,  how  players  used  their  interpretation  of  numbers  to  improve  performance  and  make 
gameplay  strategies,  and  their  reflections  on  the  negative  aspects  of  quantification  and  what 
constitutes proper relationship with quantification.  
Note:  Player  rank  information  was  collected  by  the  time  of  interview.  In  recruiting  methods  “unfamiliar 
contact” refers to the situation that the first author and a player added each other on their contact lists for a 
long  time,  but  there  was  no  communication  between  them.  This  pattern  is  common  within  the  LoL 
community,  where  players  simply  send  a  friend request  to  whom  they  just  played  with  or  against.  Many 
players  have  a  long  contact  list  containing  hundreds  of  players,  but  are  not  in  active  contact  with  the 
majority of the contact list. P23 was interviewed in 2015 before the latest round of 22 interviewees. “N/A” 
means the interviewee did not disclose this information to us during the interview. 

Table 1. Participants’ demographic information.  

22 
19 
N/A 
24 
N/A 
20 
21 
28 
28 
22 
24 
29 
19 
20 
22 
24 
26 
23 

  Age  Gender  Years 
in LoL 
6 
2 
4 
4 
3 
7 
5 
6 
5 
4 
3 
6 
5 
4 
2 
4 
5 
3 
4 
5 
3 
4 
2 

M 
P1 
M 
P2 
M 
P3 
M 
P4 
F 
P5 
M 
P6 
M 
P7 
M 
P8 
M 
P9 
F 
P10 
M 
P11 
M 
P12 
M 
P13 
F 
P14 
F 
P15 
M 
P16 
M 
P17 
M 
P18 
M 
P19  N/A 
M 
P20  N/A 
P21 
N/A 
P22  N/A  N/A 
P23  N/A  N/A 

24 

Years of using 
quantification 

4 
1 
4 
3 
2 
5 
4 
6 
3 
3 
1 
6 
3 
1 
1 
3 
2 
3 
4 
4 
3 
3 
N/A 

Player 
rank 

Silver 
Gold 
Platinum 
Platinum 
Gold 
Platinum 
Gold 
Gold 
Silver 
Silver 
Silver 
Diamond 
Silver 
Silver 

Bronze 
Platinum 
Silver 
Gold 
Gold 
Platinum 
Silver 

Bronze 
Gold 

Recruiting methods 

Direct contact 
Unfamiliar contact 
Unfamiliar contact 
Direct contact 
Unfamiliar contact 
Direct contact 
Snowball sampling 
Unfamiliar contact 
Snowball sampling 
Snowball sampling 
Direct contact 
Direct contact 
Unfamiliar contact 
Snowball sampling 
Snowball sampling 
Unfamiliar contact 
Direct contact 
Unfamiliar contact 
Direct contact 
Direct contact 
Unfamiliar contact 
Snowball sampling 
Forum recruiting 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
 
 
Entangled with Numbers: Quantified Self and Others in a Team-Based Online Game    

93:9 

When  reporting  interview  quotes,  we  use  P1,  P2,  etc.  to  denote  different  study  participants. 
We have obtained the IRB approval from our institution prior to collecting and using online data 
for  this  work.  In  considering  ethical  concerns  [9],  when  reporting  online  data,  we  paraphrased 
quotes from forum discussions to disguise the data and reduce their searchability.  

5  FINDINGS 
League  of  Legends  players  used  various  quantification  tools  to  quantify  themselves  as  well  as 
others for the purpose of progression in the game. Players frequently engaged in interpretation 
and  re-interpretation  of  their  numbers,  as  well  as  negotiation  of  numbers’  meanings  in  team 
communication.  Quantification  and  interpretation  involved  much  cognitive  work  and  invoked 
emotional  reactions,  and  sometimes  disrupted  virtual  teamwork.  Some  players  reflected  upon 
what constituted proper use of quantification. 

5.1 Nuanced and Situated Interpretation of Numbers 
LoL players acknowledged the great diversity in the numbers provided by the quantification tools. 
They, however, stressed that numbers were not self-evident. Players saw various meanings and 
implications  of  numbers.  They  tried  to  interpret  numbers  by  drawing  from  their  situated 
knowledge in LoL. 

5.1.1 Capturing Various Meanings and Implications of Numbers 
We  observed  that  numbers  were  frequently  cited  as  markers  of  skill  and  performance.  Each 
participant  that  we  interviewed  had  developed  standards  for  determining  the  meaning  of  a 
number. For example, a participant told us: 

I had 85% win rate on Ekko [a LoL champion], it was amazing… until they [Riot Games] made the 
changes  [new  game  patch]  to  remnants  of  the  watchers  [an  in-game  item].  My  KDA 
[kill/death/assist ratio] before the changes were 4.50. [P1] 
In this quote, P1 explained how his numbers associated with Ekko were negatively influenced 
by  LoL’s  recent  patch.  He  also  expressed  high  satisfaction  with  his  previous  records  associated 
with Ekko, where he considered ‘85% win rate’ and ‘4.5 KDA’ indicators of good performance.  

In a similar vein, P2 asked us to visit his op.gg profile by saying “check my lux [a LoL champion] 
win rate on op.gg… over 60%!”  P3  told  us  that  “200 CS [creep score] in 20 minutes… it is my best 
record.” In these cases, numbers that fell within certain ranges had supplied players joy and pride, 
because these numbers were considered both “good” and difficult to achieve. 

According to our study participants, numbers did not just represent gaming skills. They could 
also  reveal  other  qualities  such  as  temperament,  mindset,  motivation,  and  desire  to  win.  For 
example, a participant noted how she sometimes could discern players’ mental stability: 

If you see a player on a massive loss streak like 1:8, likely that the player is tilted… Your game is 
not going to end up well. [P5] 
“Tilt” or “tilted” means that a player’s mental state is declining, which is likely to negatively 
impact player performance. For P5, the numbers of wins and losses in the recent match history of 
a  player  did  not  simply  communicate  the  player’s  previous  performance.  The  numbers  also 
strongly  suggested  the  likelihood  of  the  player’s  chance  to  win  in  next  match.  Many  of  our 
participants  expressed  a  similar  viewpoint  with  P5  that  a  player  who  was  experiencing  or  had 
just experienced was likely to do badly in game. Beneath this logic was players’ many personal 
experiences  with  a  “vicious  cycle,”  that  losing  a  game  caused  negative  emotions  such  as 
distresses and frustrations, which in turn impacted their future games in negative ways. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
93:10 

  Y. Kou & X. Gui 

5.1.2 Interpreting Numbers in Light of Situated Knowledge 
Our participants stressed that situated knowledge of the game was key to proper interpretation 
of numbers. One type of situated knowledge of the game commonly cited by our participants is 
the knowledge regarding the different modes of the game. P7 said: 

A high KDA in normal is nice, but it says little about skill… [players] don’t try hard in normals. 
[p7] 
“Normals” refer to the normal game mode that is not ranked, in which players tend to be more 
casual. In normal mode, players tended to try new play styles and care less about winning, and 
high  KDA  could happen because the player was  trying  powerful champions while others  weak 
ones.  Experienced  players  like  P7  were  acutely  aware  of  the  distinction  between  the  two  game 
modes, and utilized this situated knowledge to make more accurate assessment. 

Another type of situated knowledge of the game frequently brought up by our participants is 
the  knowledge  of  different  champion’s  mechanism.  When  asked  what  “win  rate”  would  look 
good, P5 explained: 

It  depends  on  the  champion…  I  have  above  55%  win  rate  with  Zyra  [a  LoL  champion]  and 
generally feel like I’m carrying with her… but a Yasuo [a LoL champion] below 60% win rate is 
bad. Yasuos either solo win the game… or feed and ruin the game. [P5] 
In LoL, Zyra and Yasuo have different play styles, with the latter being high-risk, high-reward. 
Therefore,  Yasuo’s  impact  on  match  results  tends  to  be  highly  polarized.  With  knowledge  of 
different champions, P5 had developed more situated interpretations taking into account different 
play  styles  associated  with  champions.  In  this  way,  a  number  like  55%  win  rate  could  have 
different meanings per context. In addition, P5’s explanation indicated how she gradually learned 
how  to  interpret  numbers  through  her  own  experiences.  Her  general  observation  that  she 
contributed a lot to teamwork (i.e. “carrying”) was an important reason behind her belief that 55% 
was a good number for Zyra. Similarly, her experiences with Yasuo teammates deeply influenced 
her interpretation of Yasuo win rate. 

In  addition,  our  participants  also  stressed  that  gameplay  across  the  wide  spectrum  of  ranks 
was vastly different in terms of player decision making, team composition, and competitiveness. 
Therefore,  they  described  how  their  understanding  of  these  differences  influenced  their 
interpretation of numbers. For example, P14 told us: 

My Diamond friend dies averagely 6-7 times…he said he had to takes risks… [but] he almost never 
dies playing on my account [in Silver]. [P14] 
P14  narrated  a  sharp  distinction  between  Diamond  and  Silver,  and  how  such  distinction  in 
gameplay could result in different numbers: Diamond matches are more competitive and intense, 
leaving little room for players’ decision making. Therefore, P14’s friend could perceive more risks 
when playing at Diamond. However, the same player encountered few challenges at Silver, and 
thus “almost never dies.” P17 remembered that his average CS decreased as he climbed from Gold 
to  Platinum,  because  he  encountered  more  “aggressive lane opponents”  that  would  prevent  him 
from getting more CS. Like P14 and P17, many of our participants noted how the intensity and 
competitiveness of different ranks could influence numbers. 

Through playing LoL, players kept learning about various aspects of LoL that would offer new 
angles  to  interpret  numbers.  Each  player’  set  of  situated  knowledge  was  gradually  built  upon 
their  own  experiences.  Therefore,  the  derivation  of  qualitative  insights  from  numbers  was 
cognitively  challenging  to  many  players.  Online  forums  became  a  place  where  players  learned 
from  each  other  about  how  to  interpret  numbers.  We  learned  about  this  social  activity  on  the 
‘/r/leagueoflegends’ subreddit from several of our participants. Here is an example: 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

Entangled with Numbers: Quantified Self and Others in a Team-Based Online Game    

93:11 

Post: Post a link to your OP.GG profile and get advice from the community! 
I believed it could be nice if high elo players could share some advice to low elo scrubs like myself 
:) 
Player 1: My CS is trash [shared link to a op.gg player profile; removed for anonymity] 
Player 2: Miss fortune [LoL champion] and Ashe [LoL champion] were good picks for your rank. 
But you should consider playing more Annie [LoL champion] instead of Orianna [LoL champion]. 
This way you can both improve CS and focus more on the game rather than csing. 
Elo is an alternative term for player rank. In this excerpt, Player 1 invited critique upon their 
own  profile.  While  Player  1  expressed  one  of  their  numbers  (i.e.,  CS)  was  poor,  Player  2  gave 
concrete advice on improving CS as well as more general suggestions regarding how to improve 
skill. Player 2’s analysis was based on a combination of Player 1’s numbers as well as Player 2’s 
understandings of different champions’ strengths and weaknesses. 

5.2 Using Quantified Data to Strategize Gameplay 
Through the interpretation of publicly available data, LoL players conveniently reflected on their 
own performance, and learnt about their teammates and opponents. They used this knowledge to 
inform their gameplay. They could coordinate with their teammates to optimize their gameplay 
strategies. 

LoL players’ reliance on quantification for  gameplay  was manifested  in a  common linguistic 
pattern in the community. We observed numerous instances where terms denoting quantification 
tools  such  as  ‘op.gg’  and  ‘lolking’  were  used  as  not  only  nouns  but  also  as  verbs.  Players 
frequently used “op.gg me” or “lolking the player” to denote the practice of checking someone on 
specific  quantification  tools.  An  example  is  “If you op.gg me, you can see I win almost 70% of my 
Jarvan IV [a LoL champion] games.” 

5.2.1 Developing Self-Knowledge and Improving Performance 
As  players  believed  that  these  numbers  indicated  their  own  performance  and  skill,  they  took 
advantage of the quantification tools to develop insights into their own gameplay. P1 told us that 
“I mainly use op.gg to check my KDA, win rate, and .... I just like to track my progress to get better.” 
In this way, players sought to develop self-knowledge through quantification. On Reddit, a player 
shared their op.gg profile, and narrated a story of progression through numbers: 

Just  climbed  from  Plat  4  to  Diamond  5  playing  only  Fiddlestick  (86%  winrate  over  28  games) 
[shared  link  to  a  op.gg  player  profile;  removed  for  anonymity]  ...  started  tryharding  with  my 
beloved main and had this massive win streak (24 W - 4 L). 
“Main” refers to the champion that a player plays the most. In  the above quote, the player’s 

main was Fiddlestick. The player expressed excitement about improvement in the game. 

All  of  our  participants  mentioned  using  quantification  to  keep  informed  and  seek  self-

improvement. For instance, P11 said: 

My Janna’s [a LoL champion] KDA was embarrassing with 5.1 deaths per game… because most 
jannas have less than three deaths. My janna died too much because I played in a wrong way… I 
watched guides to learn builds, matchups, and itemization. 
According to P11, his interpretation of his Janna KDA was that his performance was poor and 

he needed improvement. He proceeded to learn and improve himself. 

5.2.2 Assessing and Choosing Teammates 
Participants  used  numbers  to observe the status and skill  level of  their friends. They then used 
this observation to invite skilled friends to play together. For example, P4 said: 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
93:12 

  Y. Kou & X. Gui 

I have made some friends in league…I would look them up [on quantification tools]. I know their 
best roles in the game… who I want to duo [playing with a friend] with for my placements…who I 
only play norms [normal mode] with. [P4] 
P4  shared  with  us  how  he  used  quantification  to  develop  knowledge  about  his  friends. 
Placements refer to placement matches that have a major influence over players’ rank. Building 
on the knowledge of his friends, P4 would strategize his play for the purpose of progression in 
game.  In  competitive  matches,  especially  placements  where  stakes  were  higher,  he  wanted  to 
play with friends who he believed to be highly skilled. In casual scenes, he would be more open 
to playing with friends of different skill levels. 

Players  could  perceive  whether  their  teammates  desired  to  win  through  interpretation  of 
numbers.  For  example,  P10  said that “you  know your teammates don’t want to win  when they 
pick a champ they are bad at. Chances are you already lost in champion select.” 

Players also mentioned how numbers told them whether their teammates could be potentially 
toxic in game. In an interview via the in-game messaging tool of LoL client, P1 sent the URL to an 
op.gg profile and said: 

Just check this guy. His Teemo [a LoL champion] has over 8 deaths each game with only two or 
three kills… Those players just feed and flame junglers [a role in game] all time. When he locked 
in Teemo, I insta dodged.” 
“Dodge,” or “queue dodge,” refers to the action of closing the game client to cancel a match. 
Dodge is not against LoL’s terms of service, but it wastes the computing resources for generating 
a match and causes delays to other players. Riot Games discourages this behavior by deducting a 
small amount of ranking points per time of dodge, which is less consequential than the decrease 
of  ranking points  if  losing a  match. Therefore,  players  would calculate benefits  and risks when 
deciding  whether  to  dodge.  Without  actually  playing  the  game  with  his  teammate,  P1  was 
already  confident  in  telling  about  a  teammate’s  potential  negative  behaviors  in  game. 
Interpretation  of  the  numbers  associated  with  Teemo  suggested  the  teammate’s  potential  poor 
performance in the next game. Such interpretation, combined with past experiences with Teemo 
players, supported P1’s reasoning process leading to the conclusion that his teammate could be a 
toxic  player  that  he  would  avoid  teaming  up  with,  and  thus  he  decided  to  dodge  the  game  to 
avoid the risk of losing ranking points. 

5.2.3 Negotiating with Teammates 
Participants used their numbers as evidence to support their verbal claim for certain roles in team. 
P13 shared his story with us: 

In  champ  select  lobby  I  would  say  can  I  mid?  I’m  really  good  at  a  couple  ap  carries  [roles  in 
game]. You can look me up on on.gg. Then I tell them I couldn’t do anything else... I also paste my 
op.gg link so they can click. Sometimes it works, my teammates would give their role to me… not 
every time though. [P13] 
In  this  example,  P13  talked  about  how  he  shared  his  profile  with  his  teammates  in  order  to 
convince  his  teammates  that  he  should  play  the  role  of  mid5.  Quantification  here  was  used  to 
enhance  the  legitimacy  of  his  claim.  For  this  use  of  quantification  to  work,  the  player  must  be 
aware  of  the  generally  accepted  criteria,  or  the  common  ground,  for  determining  high  or  low 
performance of particular champions and roles. Having experienced similar situations but on the 
other  side,  P7  told  us  that  “I use op.gg when someone is asking for my role. If they have a good win 

5 There are five roles on a team: top, jungle, middle, bottom, and support. The “Middle” role’s typical function is to deal lots of damage. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

                                                                 
Entangled with Numbers: Quantified Self and Others in a Team-Based Online Game    

93:13 

rate with champions in that role, that’s fine. But if someone wants to mid  with a 11% Kass [a LoL 
champion], then I’m sorry.” 

Players also used quantification to persuade their teammates into certain actions for perceived 

better winning chances. A player wrote on the official forum that: 

I  use  it  to  try  to  encourage  teammates  to  play  the  champs  they  are  actually  good  with…For 
example,  I  would  say:  o?  you  have  227  games  with  jinx  [a  LoL  champion]  adc  and  a  solid  68 
percent  wr and  are instead  deciding  to just  try  out vayne [a LoL champion]  adc with  10 games 
and 20 percent win rate?...DAMN MAN YOUR JINX IS SEXY AS FUCK!...they will likely pick jinx 
just to show how sexy their jinx is XD 
In  this  excerpt,  the  player  vividly  described  a  scenario  where  they  tried  to  persuade  their 
teammate  to  pick  a  champion  that  the  latter  was  good  at,  evidenced  in  the  combination  of 
number of games and win rate. For this player, these combined measures unambiguously pointed 
to a much better qualitative choice in champion selection. Therefore, the player took action for 
the purpose of improving their winning chance.  

Lastly,  quantification  supported  them  to  strategize  their  gameplay  for  the  best  chances  of 
winning games. Most of our participants looked up their teammates and used this knowledge to 
customize their play style. For example, P12 told us that: 

As a jungle [a role in game] main, I found op.gg extremely useful… I had a game with Nasus [a 
champion] top. He had 75% win rate over 45+ games. I knew if I could give him a good start, he 
would be able to snowball and carry the game. That’s what I did. I came to his lane right after my 
red  buff  and  gave  him  a  kill….  He  and  I  carried  the  game,  even  though  other  lanes  were  a  bit 
behind. [P12] 
The jungle role in LoL is a leadership role, requiring the player to decide which teammates to 
help  with  and  what  objectives  to  pursue  for  the  best  outcome.  For  P12,  the  analysis  of  his 
teammate’s statistics informed his play style. The subsequent win confirmed his previous theory 
about how to strategize gameplay based on interpretation of teammates’ numbers. 

5.2.4 Exploiting and Constraining Opponents 
Our participants talked about various ways of drawing from quantification to tailor strategies to 
constrain  their opponents. On the one hand, P17 told us that “I’m gonna try hard to not lose to my 
lane opponent who is having a losing streak.” In  this  example,  P17  described  a  scenario  where  he 
noticed his lane opponent’s losing streak, and surmised that his lane opponent might be “tilted.” 
P17 wanted to take advantage of this perceived weakness of the lane opponent. 

On  the  other  hand,  players  could  perceive  their  opponents  as  skillful  and  superior.  This 
perception  encouraged  players  to  adjust  their  play  styles  to  be  more  conservative.  Here  is  an 
excerpt from an online forum conversation: 

If  I  see  they  have  300  games  played  with  said  champ  in  rank,  I  know  they're  at  minimum 
experienced.  If I see KDAs that go  along the lines  of 15/4/10 for that champ after  an average of 
10+ games, I know to play safe, because that user has proven to be good with that champ multiple 
times. 
Here the player listed several convincing numbers such as “300 games” and “15/4/10,” which 
indicated a strong opponent. In such case, the player made the decision of “play safe,” meaning 
the adopting of a low-risk play style. 

Besides  adjusting 

individual  strategies,  quantification  of  opponents  also  supported 
coordination  between  teammates.  For  example,  P18  said  that  “I’m currently gold 3. If I know my 
opponent is plat 5, I will ask my jungler to camp my lane.”  Camp  describes  a  tactic  that  a  player 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
93:14 

  Y. Kou & X. Gui 

stays  close  to  their  teammate  without  being  noticed  by  opponents.  The  camper  could  then 
surprise and kill opponents with ease. When P18 noticed the quantified rank difference between 
him and his opponent, he expected his opponent to be more skilled than him. Not wanting to lose 
on his role, he would coordinate with his teammate to constrain his opponent in game. 

Players shared with their teammates what they learned from quantification of their opponents, 

so that the whole team could be mindful of the opponent team’s unique strengths. P19 noted: 

I can tell who is good on the enemy team. I would warn my team, especially if there are smurfs 
[new, low ranking accounts owned by high ranking players] on the opposing side. We can make a 
plan to shut them down early so they don’t get to carry the game. [P19] 
P19  explained  how  he  helped  make  gameplay  strategies  based  on  his  understanding  of  the 
opponents. He first made an inference about whether his opponent was a smurf. He could notice 
if a player’s numbers were unusually stronger than average players in his rank. This knowledge 
informed how he strategized his gameplay. 

5.3 Negotiating with Quantification 
In  the  first  two  sections,  we  reported  how  LoL  players  sought  to  rationalize  and  utilize  their 
interpretation of numbers, for the purpose of progression in game and optimization of teamwork. 
However, beyond the rational and instrumental use of quantification, players also had emotional 
investment  into  their  numbers.  We  observed  that  many  players  struggled  to  strike  a  balance 
between their amount of attention to their numbers and just having “fun” in game. Many of our 
study participants mentioned what constituted the proper use of quantification. 

5.3.1 Experiencing Negative Consequences Associated with Quantification 
Our study participants stressed that using quantification was useful in competitive play, and they 
felt the social pressure to do so. P11, for instance, stated that: 

I have  to use these tools to compete with  people  who already  use them… it is publicly available 
and whoever doesn’t use it is at a disadvantage. [P11] 
From  a  practical  point  of  view,  P11  stressed  how  quantification  was  already  an  integral 
component of ranked gameplay in LoL. As an individual, he could only comply with this practice 
to keep up with other LoL players. 

Our study participants also perceived various negative consequences associated with their use 
of quantification.  At the individual level, misuse of quantification could cause negative emotions 
such  as  distress  and  anxiety  among  players.  At  the  team  level,  discussions  of  numbers  could 
cause conflicts and tensions.  
Stress and Anxiety among Individual Players 
Players viewed numbers as direct indicators of their performance, and developed judgements as 
to  what  numbers  were  superior.  Pursuit  of  better  numbers  became  their  conscious  goal  while 
playing  games.  For  instance,  P6  mentioned  that  “I try to keep my deaths under 4 each game. Good 
players don’t die a lot.” Like  P6  said,  qualitative  marks  such  as  “good  players”  were  consciously 
related  to  a  specific  numerical  range.  Poor  numbers,  on  the  other  hand,  could  cause  negative 
emotions  among  players.  P14  told  us  that  “I have an embarrassing win rate with Dr Mundo… under 
40%… I’m terrible with tanks.” 

The  attention  on  numbers  and  improving  numbers  also  caused  much  stress  and  anxiety 

among several participants. P19 told us: 

Most times I’m good… But it was so stressful when I noticed that my recent win rate has dropped 
below 40%... I feel I suck at this game. [P19] 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

Entangled with Numbers: Quantified Self and Others in a Team-Based Online Game    

93:15 

As P19 articulated, undesired numbers (low recent win rate) could cause stressful experiences 

for him. 

As many players were concerned with their numbers, some of our participants mentioned the 
practice  of  KDA  padding,  similar  to  stat  padding  in  sports  where  players  focus  on  activities  of 
improving their statistics that do not contribute to actual results. P8 said: 

No one would admit it but you know it exists… yesterday they [the enemy team] were winning so 
hard that they could end the game any time, but they didn’t kill the nexus [totally destroying the 
enemy base and thus ending game]. They just kept killing us when we came back alive. [P8] 
In this example, P8 suspected that his five opponents were padding their KDAs, drawing from 
his  observation  of  a  mismatch  between  the  opponents’  overwhelming  advantage  in  game  and 
their unwillingness to end the game. He also suggested certain level of social stigma associated 
with  this  kind  of  behavior,  as  such  behavior  does  not  align  well  with  the  competitive  eSports 
culture  that  both  the  player  community  and  Riot  Games  valued.  One  of  our  participants,  P9 
expressed  strong  disdain  for  KDA  padding,  saying  that  “KDA  players  just  stupidly  ignored 
objectives like turrets and dragons... They are after kills.” A  player  on  Reddit  suggested  a  more 
nuanced view towards KDA padding, saying: 

KDA  padding  is  always  fun,  if  you're  into  that  kind  of  stuff  (as  do  I).  However,  practically 
speaking it can often be a poor indicator for general performance… A kill on a specific opponent 
becomes less significant for the gold bounty. After you have done with the maths, it doesn't make 
as much of a difference in your economy as you think it does, compared to other play style. 
“Gold  bounty”  is  the  virtual  reward  for  killing  an  opponent.  In  this  excerpt,  the  player 
suggested  that  number  could  become  an  end  in  itself,  because  better  numbers  were  desirable. 
However, an overemphasis on numbers was said to have an adverse effect on decision-making in 
game,  when  players  favored  strategies  that  could  improve  their  numbers  instead  of  those  that 
could help win the match. In this way, the player indicated that the existing set of statistics did 
not fully align with the actual effects of particular in-game actions, and therefore players should 
be cautious when using these statistics to prescribe their actions. 
Conflicts and Tensions within Teams 
Participants  also  mentioned  checking  their  teammates,  and  sometimes  became  unsatisfied  by 
teammates’  numbers.  Such  dissatisfaction  could  surface  in  communication  with  teammates, 
causing conflicts and tensions within teams. For example, P21 mentioned: 

I was constantly checking both teams on op.gg. I found it actually hurt my mentality going into 
the game believing that your team is gonna suck. I could easily start flaming my teammates for 
small mistakes, and I became the biggest reason my team lost. [P21] 
P21 described how frequent use of quantification started to incur negative consequences over 
his in-game mood and make him distressed. In some matchups, through interpreting teammates’ 
numbers and predicting match results prior to the start of the match, he already foresaw a loss 
and  attributed  it  to  his  teammates.  Such  practice  would  negatively  influence  teamwork  as  he 
became  intolerant  to  teammates’  “small  mistakes,”  which  in  turn  contributed  to  a  loss.  Similar 
experiences were discussed on Reddit, where a player wrote: 

Checking  stats  is  tilting  for  many.  If  you're  prone  to  stat  anger,  you  should  just  block  all  those 
websites in your browser. There is useful info there but avoid  it if you can't control focusing  on 
what actually may  be useful in it. If you are busy calling out people about previous games and 
why their itemization is wrong according to the pros, you are not focusing on your playing or the 
game you're in. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
93:16 

  Y. Kou & X. Gui 

“Stat anger” refers to players’  self-perceived anger triggered by  finding out teammates’ poor 
statistics. The above quote suggests that players who are likely to grow negative feelings should 
stop  using  quantification.  The  quote  further  explains  that  when  players  become  aggressive 
towards  teammates  because  of  their  poor  statistics,  they  are  not  focusing  on  the  right  things 
(themselves and the game). 

Players also mentioned their negative experiences with being judged based on their numbers. 
Our  study  participant  P15  complained  that  “teammates abused me very early on saying that my 
KDA was bad. It is unfair to judge me like that. The game is teamplay-based.”  As  P15  described,  her 
teammates  harassed  her  because  they  determined  her  numbers  to  be  poor.  In  this  way 
quantification  actually  intensified  disagreement  between  teammates,  and  even  helped  spur 
aggressive  behavior  within  team.  P16  mentioned  a  similar  incident  that  occurred  between  him 
and his  teammates  in a recent game. He said that “I just had a bad nid [a LoL champion] game. My 
teammates told me something like ‘wish you realized maybe you shouldn't play nid after you have a 
38% win rate on it over 70 games.’” 

Misuse of quantification could also fuel aggression between opponents. For example, P13 told 
us  that  “if I beat a smurf that brags a lot early game, I would mess around at the end and tease him 
about his win rate.”  According  to  many  of  our  study  participants,  most  of  the  time provocations 
took place when the match result was almost certain. For instance, P20 described: 

One day I was really annoyed by a guy checking my profile and assuming that I was bad. I just 
straight up beat his ass, follow him everywhere, take all his buffs, and defeat all his ganks. Later 
in  post-game  chat  I  told  him  that  hope  ‘op.gg  people’  works  for  you  in  future  games.  That  was 
fun. [P20] 
P20  described  how  both  he  and  his  opponents  used  quantification  to  provoke  each  other  in 

game. Such exchange tended to intensify the communication between two teams. 

5.3.2 Exploring Proper Relationships with Quantification 

Some LoL players  perceived  the downside of  using quantification. They started  to stress the 
idea  of  using  quantification  properly.  P17,  for  example,  said  that  “[you] can’t be obsessed with 
op.gg. It’s just a tool. It’s only useful if you know what it is and how to use it.”  P17  discussed  the 
proper  relationship  between  player  and  quantification.  He  noticed  the  potential  psychological 
burden  associated  with  use  of  quantification  if  a  player  dedicated  too  much  attention  to  it.  He 
pointed to the instrumental value of quantification, and stressed players’ own responsibility and 
capacity in proper use. 

One common way our participants used to cope with the psychological burden was non-use. 
For  example,  P6  noted  that  “stop using it if it psychs you out.”  P6  saw  non-use  as  a  way  of 
avoiding negative emotions. Some players reported concrete benefits of non-use. P21 told us that 
“I  simply  stopped.  I  am  feeling  much  better  now  and  my  rank  has  moved  up  as  well.”  Another 
participant P22 reported: 

I used to check my teammates and got tilted a lot. Nowadays I don’t do it any more… I start to 
focus on my own play because this is the only thing I can control and improve... I learn more each 
game. [P22] 
Both  P21  and  P22  had  been  frequent  users  of  quantification.  However,  they  changed  their 
behavior upon noticing the negative aspects of overusing quantification, in order to take care of 
their  own  psychological  wellbeing.  Their  descriptions  sought  to  articulate  a  causal  relationship 
between non-use and subsequent positive experiences, in terms of increased rank and learning. 

While  non-use  was  on  the  extreme  end  in  terms  of  the  relationship  between  the  self  and 

quantification, some players proposed a more nuanced approach. For instance, P23 told us that: 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

Entangled with Numbers: Quantified Self and Others in a Team-Based Online Game    

93:17 

It is very hard to balance. If I use it too much, it starts to get to me… My principle is that I won’t 
bother  as  long  as  the  team  comp  looks  decent.  But  if  I  see  some  picks  that  are  far  from  meta 
[widely  accepted  champion  select  strategy],  like  ashe  jungle,  I  gotta  make  sure  that  he  is  not 
trolling. [P23] 
P23  admitted  the  psychological  toll  of  misusing  quantification.  However,  he  did  not  simply 
stop  using,  or  constantly  use,  quantification  tools.  He  adopted  a  case-by-case  approach  with 
consideration of specific conditions. 

6 DISCUSSION 
In this paper, we reported an ethnographic account of quantification in the player community of 
League of Legends. The player community celebrates a highly competitive culture where players 
aspire  to  higher  ranks,  and  admire  high-ranking  players,  especially  professional  players,  which 
has been commonly found in eSports gaming communities [39,44,73,77]. Therefore, it is perhaps 
unsurprising that numbers and quantification play an indispensable role in this community. The 
complexity  of  quantification  practices  is  conditioned  by  the  publicity  of  every  single  member’s 
statistics accumulated across multiple years, an abundance of advanced quantification tools, and 
years  of  development  of  a  culture  of  interpretation  of  numbers.  All  players  are  involved, 
regardless  of  their  willingness.  Players  who  refuse  to  use  quantification  are  still  subject  to  the 
quantification, evaluation, and judgment from their teammates and opponents.  

In many ways, players’ own accounts and forums discussions are in alignment with the ideal 
of developing “self-knowledge through numbers,” as they adeptly used quantification to develop 
knowledge about themselves as well as their teammates and opponents in order to win matches 
and subsequently improve ranks. However, quantification could also take a toll on players, both 
cognitively and emotionally, as players also struggled to find a balance in their relationship with 
numbers,  realizing  that  improper  use  of  quantification  could  can  distress  them  and  negatively 
impact  virtual  teamwork.  Next,  we  discuss  implications  of  the  multiplicity  of  perspectives  on 
numbers, the relationship between quantification and trust, and players’ notion of proper use in 
relation to self-knowledge. 

6.1 A Complex Dance Between Interpretive Flexibility and Numerical Authority 
Our findings about the nuances and complexities in players’ experiences with numbers resonates 
with  Espeland  and  Stevens  that  numbers  have  multiple  meanings  and  purposes  [26].  Numbers 
generated  through  quantification  had  multiple  meanings  to  participants.  These  meanings  were 
constructed  based  on  players’  interpretations,  experiences,  and  discussions  with  other  players 
within  the  community.  The  numbers  could  be  an  explicit  representation  of  player  skill  and 
performance,  evident in how study  participants  took pride in their high  win rate  champions in 
interviews. Participants also believed that they could capture many other personal qualities such 
as  mental  state  and  desire  to  win  through  scrutiny  of  statistics  such  as  win  rate  and  match 
history. 

Numbers  also  possessed  multiple  types  of  purposes,  which  could  analyzed  as  “deeds”  [26]. 
They not only described what a player had achieved in the past, but also advised in-game actions, 
and predicted whether the player would either succeed or fail in the future. Our findings reported 
many accounts where numbers inspired players to predict match results and strategize gameplay. 
In Table 2, we summarize representative types of numbers and their purposes. (A comprehensive 
list of types is infeasible due to page limit.) However, it is important to note that numbers did not 
work alone, and sometimes players triangulated multiple numbers to develop an explanation. For 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
93:18 

  Y. Kou & X. Gui 

instance, we discussed how P19 used both long-term statistics and his own rank to infer that his 
opponent was probably a smurf. 

Codes for purposes: 1: self-evaluation; 2: inferring about others’ skill; 3: inferring about others’ mentality; 4, 
strategizing gameplay 

Table 2. Representative types of numbers and purposes.  

Purposes  Description 
1, 2, 4 

Types 
Player ranks such as 
Gold and Diamond 

Long-term stats on a 
champion such as 
KDA, win rate, and 
CS 
Recent match history 
(esp., the win/loss 
ratio) 

1, 2, 4 

3, 4 

Player rank was the primary if not the most important 
indicator of player skill (1, 2). Players respected and 
followed higher-ranked players (4). 
These cumulative averages indicated how good a player 
was at this champion (1,2), and supported strategizing 
gameplay around teammates who picked familiar 
champions (4). 
A loss streak in recent matches could cause anxiety and 
frustrations (3). To win, players could make plans to 
constrain and frustrate an opponent who was already 
frustrated (4). 

Such  multiplicity  of  meanings  and  purposes  highlights  the  vast  flexibility  of  interpreting 
numbers  in  LoL.  Such  interpretive  flexibility  of  numbers  is  rooted  in  players’  diverse  sets  of 
situated knowledge. For example, P5 and Yasuo players would have very different opinions about 
whether a win rate of 55% was good enough on Yasuo. P15 once disagreed with her teammates 
upon the interpretation of KDA.  

Importantly,  beneath  these  disagreements  over  how  to  interpret  numbers  was  in  fact  the 
authority  many  LoL  players  granted  to  the  numbers  and  quantification  tools.  Authority, 
according  to  Weber,  is  a  form  of  power  that  is  legitimate  without  either  coercion  or  threat  of 
violence  [78].  Such  numerical  authority  resided  in  many  characteristics  of  quantification  tools: 
the  overwhelming  amount  of  numbers  that  implied  their  comprehensiveness,  the  archival  of 
complete  historical  data  that  expressed  a  sense  of  continuum,  and  the  fast  response  time  that 
communicated reliability. Numerical authority also rested in players’ own practices, such as their 
sustained  use  and  learning  to  use,  and  their  discussions  with  others  regarding  how  to  use 
quantification. 

Numerical  authority  guided  players  to  develop  categories  such  as  the  dichotomy  between 
“good”  and  “bad,”  albeit  in  a  distributed  and  informal  fashion.  Still,  players’  classification 
activities  resonated  with  what  Bowker  and  Star  warned  about  the  ramifications  of 
institutionalized  and  formalized  classification  systems  [5].  For  example,  the  South  Africa  racial 
classification  system  sorted  individuals  into  four  major  racial  groups  which  intrinsically 
supported the ruling classes’ identity and legitimacy, but Bowker and Star found individual cases 
that did not comply with the legal and technical-scientific delineations [5]. In our study, players 
agreed  upon  the  purposes  of  various  numbers,  but  were  rarely  unanimous  on  how  to  interpret 
them. Classification activities were constantly carried out at the individual level and met constant 
pushback  as  players  rejected  to  be  classified  as  “bad”  players.  Without  institutional  push  and 
practical  needs,  it  is  possible  that  players’  classification  activities  are  in  in  a  constant  flux, 
manifesting a complex dance between interpretive flexibility and numerical authority. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
 
 
Entangled with Numbers: Quantified Self and Others in a Team-Based Online Game    

93:19 

6.2 Quantification and the Communicative Aspect of Trust  
Resonating with  many  game scholars’ observation of  the  blurring  boundary between  work and 
play  [56,57,80],  LoL  players’  participation  also  involved  intense  work  in  terms  of  the  sheet 
amount  of  knowledge  to  learn  about,  necessary  attention,  energy,  and  techniques  to  guarantee 
their  performance.  Therefore,  quantification  did  not  simply  enhance  or  challenge  LoL’s  virtual 
teamwork.  Rather,  it  had  an  intensifying  and  complicating  effect  by  demanding  cognitive 
engagement  from  all  players  who  were  already  “working.”  Therefore,  there  were  parallels 
between  the  use  of  quantification  in  LoL  teams  and  collaborative  traces  in  global  software 
development. 

Building  upon  prior  discussions  of  the  utility  of  collaborative  traces  in  developing  trust  in 
virtual  teams  [55,74],  in  this  paper,  we  found  similar  cases  such  as  P12’s  example  where  LoL 
players  developed  better  understandings  of  and  trust  in  their  teammates,  and  proceeded  to 
strategize  around  competent  teammates.  However,  these  cases  were  oftentimes  ideal  scenarios 
where  teammates  perceived  each  other’s  numbers  in  an  acceptable  range  and  were  willing  to 
coordinate. 

Discussing how trust can be developed or enhanced by quantification speaks to the notion of 
instrumental  trust  [8].  Instrumental  trust  rests  upon  instrumental  rational  efficiency  of  the 
system, or the instrumental value of quantification to players in our study. However, Brown sees 
trust as “inherently irrational and affective,” because trust is a response to uncertainty, which is 
then  linked  to  potential  anxiety  [8].  Therefore,  the  instrumental  perspective  is  insufficient  in 
understanding  the  relationship  between  quantification  and  trust.  Players  could  easily  develop 
trust  or  expectations  in  their  teammates  with  superior  numbers  that  had  a  convincing  power. 
However,  our  findings  about  individuals’  anxiety  as  well  as  team-level  tensions  and  conflicts 
reflected  the  inherent  irrationality  and  affection  in  the  process  in  which  players  used 
quantification  with  ensuing  trust  or  distrust.  Therefore,  our  findings  point  to  nuances  and 
complexities of trust beyond the instrumental perspective. 

Niklas  Luhmann  proposed  the  notion  of  communicative  trust  [51].  According  to  Luhmann, 
communicative trust has three qualities: the process of trust requires mutual commitment as two 
sides  must  be  involved;  the  building  up  of  trust  depends  on  easily  interpretable  situations  and 
possibility  of  communication;  and  trust  can  only  be  offered  and  accepted,  not  demanded  [51]. 
Indeed,  our  findings  resonate  with  this  communicative  aspect  of  trust.  To  cope  with  the  trust 
issues in their teamwork, players frequently performed various communicative acts. They could 
draw upon their own numbers to legitimize a claim, to confront their teammates’ decisions which 
they  deemed  unhelpful  to  team,  or  to  negotiate  strategies.  Through  communication,  trust  and 
distrust could be expressed, established, enhanced, or diminished. 

The communicative aspect of trust was heightened in LoL teams in comparison to previously 
studied global software development teams, for several reasons. First, despite the many parallels 
between  work  and  play,  LoL’s  teamwork  environment  often  lacks  professional  etiquette  and 
courtesy that would be more typical in workplace [17]. By contrast, LoL is an online game where 
interpersonal aggression is a common theme [43,48,71]. Therefore, it is perhaps unsurprising that 
almost  all  of  our  participants  reportedly  spoke  out  in  game,  expressing  concerns  about  trust. 
Second,  LoL  is  a  highly  competitive  team-based  game,  and  players  need  to  rely  on  their 
teammates  to  win  [43].  Therefore,  players  often  have  scrupulous  attention  to  their  teammates’ 
performance and status. Third, LoL players considered their numbers as part of their identity and 
endeavored to improve them [44], much like prior studies of how social media users made efforts 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
93:20 

  Y. Kou & X. Gui 

to improve their numerical representations [22,38]. Taking pride in their own numbers, players 
might defend against teammates’ questions and doubts. 

The  perspective  of  communicative  trust  also  invites  reflections  upon  possible  hidden 
disagreements and tensions when researching and implementing collective traces for trust. It is 
likely  that  people  have  diverse  interpretations  of  capacity  and  performance,  even  in  ideal 
scenarios where through predefined measurements collective traces are reported to enhance trust. 
Unrecognition  of  invisible  disagreements  and  tensions  could  have  a  deteriorating  effect  in  the 
long run. It  is important to investigate what  narratives  or perspectives are  preferred,  and what 
are rendered invisible or marginalized. 

6.3 Proper Use of Quantification 
Our  findings  reported  a  variety  of  negative  consequences  and  burdens  as  perceived  by  our 
participants. There were stress and anxiety as the individual level, and conflicts and tensions at 
the  team  level.  These  negative  consequences  echoed  a  few  HCI  studies  of  self-tracking  that 
reported  on  emotional  burdens  [15,42].  When  players  ascribed  much  authority  to  numbers  and 
believed in numbers’ explanatory and prescriptive power, the power relation was produced and 
reproduced between people and technology. But in this power relation, it is quantification tools 
that discipline and punish people, instead of people consciously manage technology use. 

In self-tracking the notion of self-knowledge was often traced back to Foucault to discuss how 
self-tracking  technologies  could  help  the  production  of  self-knowledge  [49,53].  However, 
Foucault stressed the importance of human agency in discovering self-knowledge, and examined 
how  self-examination  such  as  confession  and  reflective  writing  constituted  technologies  of  the 
self [28]. That is, the discovery of self-knowledge is only enacted when people keep interrogating 
themselves  about  their  relationships  with  any  entities  beyond  the  self,  including  the  numbers. 
However,  when  quantification  tools  acquired  numerical  authority  from  players,  it  became 
epistemologically  dangerous  if  players  blindly  bestowed  trust  in  quantification  tools.  The 
numerical authority prescribed player actions towards caring about numbers, improving numbers, 
and judging others based on numbers. 

It  is  against  this  backdrop  that  certain  players  became  aware  of  the  ramifications  of 
quantification.  They  stressed  proper  use  of  quantification.  By  proper  use  we  mean  players 
individually developed normative judgments on how and when to use quantification tools. They 
did not presume knowledge obtained from quantification was the absolute truth. They perceived 
limitations  of  numbers  and  knew  that  they  should  use  quantification  in  a  proper  way  so  as  to 
avoid  negative  consequences  such  as  frustration,  anxiety,  and  aggression  towards  teammates. 
Therefore, proper use of quantification in our study has two orientations: one towards the inner 
self where players took care of their own mind and emotion, and one towards the social where 
they  tried  to  sort  out  the  proper  relationships  with  other  players.  Both  orientations  were 
intertwined and together constituted proper use of quantification in players’ terms.  

The inward and outward orientations manifested themselves both cognitively and emotionally. 
Along the inward orientation, cognitive proper use suggested that players could reasonably and 
logically develop understanding of their own skill and performance. For example, a player would 
not make judgments about their skill based on bad KDA in one single match, but would perform 
detailed  analysis  to  cultivate  deeper  understanding  of  themselves  and  the  game,  drawing  from 
their situated knowledge. Emotional proper use suggested that players could effectively manage 
their emotions when watching their own numbers. They would easily cope with frustrations and 
anxiety.  Along  the  outward  orientation,  cognitive  proper  use  suggested  that  players  could 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

Entangled with Numbers: Quantified Self and Others in a Team-Based Online Game    

93:21 

reasonably and logically reason about another players’ capacity. Emotional proper use suggested 
that  players  would  not  perform  aggressive  behaviors  such  as  harassment  towards  their 
teammates and opponents. 

Importantly, what constituted proper use of quantification was highly individualistic. Players 
might have vastly different ideas of what constituted their own proper use. For example, we have 
several  players  who  reportedly  felt  comfortable  checking  every  single  opponent  and  teammate 
during a match. But we also have P21 and P22 who refrained from doing so to take care of their 
own mind.  

7 IMPLICATIONS FOR DESIGN 
The findings in this paper seek to present a holistic narrative of quantification use in a site, and is 
intended  to  propose  “new  ways  of  imagining  the  relationship  between  people  and  technology” 
[19]. Drawing from previous literature and our findings, we discuss several design implications. 
First,  while  players  granted  numerical  authority  to  quantification  tools,  mutual  understanding 
and  shared  ways  of  interpretation  are  still  missing.  This  is  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  maturized 
player  statistical  analysis  and  measurement  systems  in  sports,  such  as  sabermetrics  in  baseball 
and APBRmetrics in basketball [16,70]. Contested interpretations and understandings resulted in 
diverse play preferences that players disagreed a lot upon. Therefore, for eSports games to move 
forward,  it  is  perhaps  helpful  if  authorities  such  as  game  developers  could  carry  out  efforts  in 
standardizing and classifying player metrics. However, from a critical point of view, they should 
also be aware of the potential ramifications of establishing a centralized, formalized classification 
system  (see  [5,63]).  For  example,  the  diversity  of  player  experience  might  suffer  as  players  are 
further  motivated  to  choose  only  top-ranked  play  styles  such  as  champion  picks,  team 
composition, and in-game strategies. 

Second, in terms of the amount of numbers for acquiring self-knowledge, more is not better. 
Statistics,  measurements,  analyses  on  the  third-party  websites  were  already  extensive  and 
complicated,  but  they  did  not  fulfil  players’  needs  in  understanding  themselves  or  their 
teammates.  Players  had  the  burden  of  combing  through  all  the  statistics  to  come  up  with  their 
own ways of explanation, often intuitively. One possible solution is to improve the visualization 
of these quantification tools, like many collective trace tools already explored [29,74]. Currently 
many  quantification  tools  merely  present  numerous  tables  showing  all  the  player  data  (e.g., 
Figure 1). 

Third, the wide range of situated knowledge necessary for making sense of numbers demands 
players, especially beginners, to learn how to interpret numbers and derive insights. Our findings 
showed that players utilized online forums to seek help. Currently most quantification tools only 
provide raw data in forms of table. They could bridge this knowledge gap by employing advanced 
data analytic techniques to provide certain insights into how to improve gameplay. 

Fourth,  players  needed  to  switch  windows  between  their  game  client  and  third-party 
quantification tools to get informed. This is consistent with the contemporary industry practices 
of commercial game companies that rely upon enthusiastic players to voluntarily develop third-
party  tools  and  in-game  add-on  items  [47].  However,  it  creates  additional  labor  for  players. 
Future game design could consider presenting more statistics for players. 

Lastly,  our  discussion  of  communicative  trust  suggested  that  it  is  important  to  attend  to 
individual teammates’ interpretations and potential disagreements. Design of collaborative traces 
could  consider  ways  of  encouraging  direct  communication  of  trust  and  distrust,  and  resolving 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
93:22 

  Y. Kou & X. Gui 

potential  tensions  at  an  early  stage.  For  example,  a  communication  channel  could  be  opened 
whether interpretations of traces could be exchanged and explained. 

8 LIMITATION AND FUTURE WORK 
With  a  primary  focus  on  the  role  of  quantification  in  virtual  teams  in  League  of  Legends,  this 
study  left many  underexplored areas  that warrant future analysis. One such  area is the privacy 
concerns of LoL players as the owner of League of Legends publicizes their personal data. In the 
main  body  of  this  paper,  we  analyzed  how  players  held  a  pragmatic  attitude  towards  such 
publicity,  but  such  acceptance  was  also  contested,  as  a  few  players  did  express  certain  privacy 
concerns. Future work can be done towards a more systematic analysis. Another underexplored 
area  is  the  aesthetics  of  quantification,  manifested  in  LoL  players’  consumption  of  the  charts, 
graphs,  and  tables  presented  by  quantification  tools.  Espeland  and  Stevens  suggested  two 
universal  aesthetic  ideals  for  numerical  pictures  which  are  clarify  and  parsimony  [26].  We 
observed that players were aware of the great variety of available tools, and talked about whether 
the views presented by particular tools were “messy” or aesthetically pleasing. Future work can 
compare different tools along this aesthetic dimension. 

9 CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we reported an ethnographic account of quantification in League of Legends. We 
analyzed  how  quantification  was  adopted  as  an  integral  part  of  the  highly  competitive  gaming 
culture.  We  observed  the  complicated  relationship  between  players  and  numbers  comprised  of 
interpretation and negotiation. By analyzing numbers as deeds, we started to see how numbers 
gained authority and exerted influence over players. This case of quantification use in an online 
game  community  also  inspired  us  to  reflect  on  broader  issues  such  as  what  constitutes  self-
knowledge  obtained 
interplay  between  quantification  and 
surveillance, and the role of quantification in virtual teams. We thus caution against an optimistic 
tone  of  narrating  quantification  as  a  way  of  empowering,  and  stress  a  reflection  on  the  proper 
use  of  quantification  against  the  backdrop  of  the  increasing  prevalence  of  personal  informatics 
systems. 

through  quantification, 

the 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We thank our participants for sharing their thoughts and experiences with us. We are grateful to the 
anonymous reviewers and the associate chairs for their generous and constructive feedback. Their cogent 
and detailed suggestions helped us improve the article in significant ways. 

REFERENCES 
[1]  Anders Albrechtslund. 2008. Online social networking as participatory surveillance. First Monday 13, 3 (2008). 
[2]  Anders Albrechtslund and Lynsey Dubbeld. 2005. The Plays and Arts of Surveillance: Studying Surveillance as Entertainment. 

[3] 
[4] 

Surveill. Soc. 3, 2/3 (2005), 216–221. 
John Langshaw Austin. 1975. How to do things with words. Clarendon Press. 
Jeffrey  Bardzell,  Jeffrey  Nichols,  Tyler  Pace,  and  Shaowen  Bardzell.  2012.  Come  Meet  Me  at  Ulduar:  Progression  Raiding  in 
World of Warcraft. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work- CSCW ’12, 603–612. 

[5]  Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh Star. 2000. Sorting Things Out: Classification and Its Consequences. MIT Press. 
[6]  Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual. Res. Psychol. 3, 2 (January 2006), 77–101. 

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa 

[7]  Andrea Mubi Brighenti. 2018. The Social Life of Measures: Conceptualizing Measure–Value Environments. Theory, Cult. Soc. 35, 

1 (January 2018), 23–44. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/0263276416689028 

[8]  Patrick R. Brown. 2008. Trusting in the New NHS: instrumental versus communicative action. Sociol. Health Illn. 30, 3 (2008), 

349–363. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

Entangled with Numbers: Quantified Self and Others in a Team-Based Online Game    

93:23 

[9]  Amy Bruckman. 2002. Studying the amateur artist: A perspective on disguising data collected in human subjects research on the 

Internet. Ethics Inf. Technol. 4, 3 (2002), 217–231. 

[10]  Michel Callon and John Law. 2005. On Qualculation, Agency, and Otherness. Environ. Plan. D Soc. Sp. 23, 5 (October 2005), 717–

733. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1068/d343t 

[11]  Rafael  A.  Calvo  and  Dorian  Peters.  2013.  The  irony  and  re-interpretation  of  our  quantified  self.  In  Proceedings of the 25th 
Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference on Augmentation, Application, Innovation, Collaboration - OzCHI ’13,  367–
370. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2541016.2541070 

[12]  Eun  Kyoung  Choe,  Nicole  B  Lee,  Bongshin  Lee,  Wanda  Pratt,  and  Julie  A  Kientz.  2014.  Understanding  Quantified-selfers’ 
Practices  in  Collecting  and  Exploring  Personal  Data.  In  Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’14), 1143–1152. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557372 

[13]  Chia-Fang Chung, Elena Agapie, Jessica Schroeder, Sonali Mishra, James Fogarty, and Sean A Munson. 2017. When Personal 
Tracking  Becomes  Social:  Examining  the  Use  of  Instagram  for  Healthy  Eating.  In  Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17), 1674–1687. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025747 

[14]  Franck  Cochoy.  2008.  Calculation,  qualculation,  calqulation:  shopping  cart  arithmetic,  equipped  cognition  and  the  clustered 

consumer. Mark. Theory 8, 1 (March 2008), 15–44. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/1470593107086483 

[15]  Felicia  Cordeiro,  Daniel  A  Epstein,  Edison  Thomaz,  Elizabeth  Bales,  Arvind  K  Jagannathan,  Gregory  D  Abowd,  and  James 
Fogarty. 2015. Barriers and Negative Nudges: Exploring Challenges in Food Journaling. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15), 1159–1162. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702155 

[16]  Gabriel  B.  Costa,  Michael  R.  Huber,  and  John  T.  Saccoman.  2008.  Understanding sabermetrics : an introduction to the science of 

baseball statistics. McFarland & Co. 

[17]  Michael Curtin. 1985. A Question of Manners: Status and Gender in Etiquette and Courtesy. J. Mod. Hist. 57, 3 (September 1985), 

396–423. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1086/242859 

[18]  Alan R. Dennis, Lionel P. Robert, Aaron M. Curtis, Stacy T. Kowalczyk, and Bryan K. Hasty. 2012. Trust Is in the Eye of the 
Beholder: A Vignette Study of Postevent Behavioral Controls’ Effects on Individual Trust in Virtual Teams. Inf. Syst. Res. 23, 2 
(June 2012), 546–558. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1287/isre.1110.0364 

[19]  Paul Dourish. 2006. Implications for design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems - CHI 

’06, 541–550. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124855 

[20]  Paul Dourish and Victoria Bellotti. 1992. Awareness and Coordination in Shared Workspaces. In proc. of CSCW 1992, 107–114. 

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/143457.143468 

[21]  Paul  Dourish  and  Scott  D.  Mainwaring.  2012.  Ubicomp’s  colonial  impulse.  In  Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on 

Ubiquitous Computing, 133–142. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2370216.2370238 

[22]  Nicole Ellison, Rebecca Heino, and Jennifer Gibbs. 2006. Managing Impressions Online: Self-Presentation Processes in the Online 

Dating Environment. J. Comput. Commun. 11, 2 (January 2006), 415–441. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1083-6101.2006.00020.x 

[23]  Jacques Ellul. 1964. The Technological Society. Vintage Books. 
[24]  Thomas  Erickson  and  Wendy  A.  Kellogg.  2000.  Social  translucence:  an  approach  to  designing  systems  that  support  social 

processes. ACM Trans. Comput. Interact. 7, 1 (March 2000), 59–83. 

[25]  Wendy  Nelson  Espeland and Mitchell  L.  Stevens.  1998.  Commensuration  as  a  Social  Process.  Annu. Rev. Sociol.  24,  1  (August 

1998), 313–343. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.soc.24.1.313 

[26]  Wendy  Nelson  Espeland  and  Mitchell  L.  Stevens.  2008.  A  Sociology  of  Quantification.  Eur. J. Sociol. / Arch. Eur. Sociol. / Eur. 

Arch. für Soziologie 49, (2008), 401–436. DOI:https://doi.org/10.2307/23998802 

[27]  Michel Foucault. 1988. The History of Sexuality, Vol. 3: The Care of the Self (First Vint ed.). Vintage. 
[28]  Michel  Foucault.  1998.  Technologies  of  the  self.  In  Ethics: Subjectivity and Truth (Essential Works of Foucault, 1954-1984, Vol. 1), 

Paul Rabinow (ed.). The New Press, New York, 223–252. 

[29]  Jon Froehlich and Paul Dourish. 2004. Unifying Artifacts and Activities in a Visual Tool for Distributed Software Development 

Teams. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Software Engineering, 387–396. 

[30]  Penelope  Sue Greenberg,  Ralph  H.  Greenberg,  and  Yvonne  Lederer  Antonucci. 2007.  Creating  and  sustaining trust  in  virtual 

teams. Bus. Horiz. 50, 4 (July 2007), 325–333. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BUSHOR.2007.02.005 

[31]  Xinning Gui, Yu Chen, Clara Caldeira, Dan Xiao, and Yunan Chen. 2017. When Fitness Meets Social Networks: Investigating 
Fitness  Tracking  and  Social  Practices  on  WeRun.  In  Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  - 
CHI ’17, 1647–1659. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025654  

[32]  Carl  Gutwin  and  Saul  Greenberg.  1998.  Design  for  individuals,  design  for  groups:  tradeoffs  between  power  and  workspace 
awareness.  In  Proceedings  of  the  1998  ACM  conference  on  Computer  supported  cooperative  work    -  CSCW  ’98,  207–216. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/289444.289495 

[33]  B.M.S.  Hammarfelt,  S. de  Rijcke,  and  A.D.  Rushforth.  2016.  Quantified  academic  selves:  The  gamification of  science  through 

social networking services. Inf. Res. 21, 2 (2016). 

[34]  Linda Henderson, Eileen Honan, and Sarah Loch. 2016. The production of the academicwritingmachine. Reconceptualizing Educ. 

Res. Methodol. 7, 2 (December 2016). DOI:https://doi.org/10.7577/rerm.1838 

[35]  Guido  Hertel,  Udo  Konradt,  and  Borris  Orlikowski.  2004.  Managing  distance  by  interdependence:  Goal  setting,  task 
interdependence,  and  team-based  rewards  in  virtual  teams.  Eur.  J.  Work  Organ.  Psychol.  13,  1  (March  2004),  1–28. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/13594320344000228 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
93:24 

  Y. Kou & X. Gui 

[36]  Eileen Honan, Linda Henderson, and Sarah Loch. 2015. Producing Moments of Pleasure within the Confines of an Academic 

Quantified. Creat. Approaches to Res. 8, 3 (2015), 44–62. 

[37]  Yun  Huang,  Wenyue  Ye,  Nicholas  Bennett,  and  Noshir  Contractor.  2013.  Functional  or  Social?:  Exploring  Teams  in  Online 

Games. In (CSCW ’13), 399–408. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2441776.2441822 

[38]  Jin  Yea  Jang,  Kyungsik  Han,  Patrick  C.  Shih,  and  Dongwon  Lee.  2015.  Generation  Like:  Comparative  Characteristics  in 
Instagram.  In  Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’15,  4039–4042. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702555 

[39]  Dal Yong Jin. 2010. Korea’s Online Gaming Empire. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. 
[40]  Prasert  Kanawattanachai  and  Youngjin  Yoo.  2002.  Dynamic  nature  of  trust  in  virtual  teams.  J. Strateg. Inf. Syst.  11,  3–4 

(December 2002), 187–213. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0963-8687(02)00019-7 

[41]  Nedim  Karakayali,  Burc  Kostem,  and  Idil  Galip.  2018.  Recommendation  Systems  as  Technologies  of  the  Self:  Algorithmic 
3–24. 

Theory,  Cult. 

of  Music 

(March 

Taste. 

2018), 

and 

Soc. 

35, 

2 

Control 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/0263276417722391 

Formation 

the 

[42]  Dmitri S. Katz, Blaine A. Price, Simon Holland, and Nicholas Sheep Dalton. 2018. Data, Data Everywhere, and Still Too Hard to 

Link: Insights from User Interactions with Diabetes Apps. In CHI’2018. 

[43]  Yubo Kou and Xinning Gui. 2014. Playing with strangers: understanding temporary teams in League of Legends. In Proceedings 
of  the  first  ACM  SIGCHI  annual  symposium  on  Computer-human  interaction  in  play  -  CHI  PLAY  ’14,  161–169. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2658537.2658538 

[44]  Yubo Kou, Xinning Gui, and Yong Ming Kow. 2016. Ranking Practices and Distinction in League of Legends. In Proceedings of 
4–9. 

on  Computer-Human 

Interaction 

-  CHI 

PLAY 

Play 

’16, 

in 

2016  Annual 

the 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2967934.2968078 

Symposium 

[45]  Yubo Kou, Xinning Gui, Shaozeng Zhang, and Bonnie Nardi. 2017. Managing Disruptive Behavior through Non-Hierarchical 
Governance:  Crowdsourcing  in  League  of  Legends  and  Weibo.  Proc. ACM Human-Computer Interact.  1,  CSCW  (2017),  62. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3134697 

[46]  Yubo Kou, Yao Li, Xinning Gui, and Eli Suzuki-Gill. 2018. Playing with Streakiness in Online Games: How Players Perceive and 
React  to  Winning  and  Losing  Streaks  in  League  of  Legends.  In  Proceedings of the 2018 CHI conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems - CHI ’18, Paper No. 578. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174152 
[47]  Yong Ming Kow and Bonnie Nardi. 2010. Who owns the Mods? First Monday 15, 5 (2010). 
[48]  Haewoon Kwak and Jeremy Blackburn. 2014. Linguistic Analysis of Toxic Behavior in an Online Video Game. In International 

Conference on Social Informatics. 

[49]  Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A stage-based model of personal informatics systems. In Proceedings of the 2010 CHI 

conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’10, 557-566. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753409 

[50]  Xing Li. 2017. The League of Legends Worlds final reached 60 million unique viewers. dotesports. 
[51]  Niklas Luhmann. 2018. Trust and power. John Wiley & Sons. 
[52]  Deborah  Lupton.  2013.  Understanding  the  Human  Machine  [Commentary].  IEEE  Technol.  Soc.  Mag.  32,  4  (2013),  25–30. 

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1109/MTS.2013.2286431 

[53]  Deborah Lupton. 2014. Self-tracking cultures: towards a sociology of personal informatics. In Proceedings of the 26th Australian 
77–86. 

Interaction  Conference  on  Designing  Futures 

the  Future  of  Design 

-  OzCHI 

’14, 

Computer-Human 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2686612.2686623 

[54]  George Marcus. 1995. Ethnography in/of the World System: The Emergence of Multi-Sited Ethnography. Annu. Rev. Anthropol. 

24, (1995), 95–117. 

[55]  Jennifer Marlow, Laura Dabbish, and Jim Herbsleb. 2013. Impression formation in online peer production: activity traces and 
personal  profiles  in  github.  In  Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative work - CSCW ’13,  117–128. 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2441776.2441792 

[56]  Ethan R. Mollick and Nancy Rothbard. 2013. Mandatory Fun: Gamification and the Impact of Games at Work. SSRN Electron. J. 

(September 2013). DOI:https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2277103 

[57]  Bonnie Nardi. 2010. My Life as a Night Elf Priest: An Anthropological Account of World of Warcraft. University of Michigan Press. 
[58]  Bonnie Nardi and Justin Harris. 2006. Strangers and friends: collaborative play in world of warcraft. In Proceedings of the 2006 

20th anniversary conference on Computer supported cooperative work, 149–158. 

[59]  Kenton  O’Hara,  Maxine  Glancy,  and  Simon  Robertshaw.  2008.  Understanding  collective  play  in  an  urban  screen  game.  In 

(CSCW ’08), 67–76. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1460563.1460576 

[60]  Gary  Olson  and  Judith  Olson.  2000.  Distance  Matters.  Human-Computer  Interact.  15,  2  (September  2000),  139–178. 

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1207/S15327051HCI1523_4 

[61]  Michael Quinn Patton. 1990. Qualitative evaluation and research methods. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks. 
[62]  Linda  Peters  and  Ronald  J.  Karren.  2009.  An  Examination  of  the  Roles  of  Trust  and  Functional  Diversity  on  Virtual  Team 

Performance Ratings. Gr. Organ. Manag. 34, 4 (August 2009), 479–504. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/1059601107312170 

[63]  Kathleen  H  Pine  and  Max  Liboiron.  2015.  The  Politics  of  Measurement  and  Action.  In  Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 

Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15), 3147–3156. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702298 

[64]  Matt  Porter.  2016.  League  of  Legends  Surpasses  100  Million  Monthly  Active  Players.  ign.com.  Retrieved  from: 

http://www.ign.com/articles/2016/09/14/league-of-legends-surpasses-100-million-monthly-active-players 

[65]  Neil Postman. 1993. Technopoly: The Surrender of Culture to Technology (1st ed.). Vintage. 
[66]  Neil Postman. 2006. Amusing ourselves to death : public discourse in the age of show business. Penguin. 

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

Entangled with Numbers: Quantified Self and Others in a Team-Based Online Game    

93:25 

[67]  Lionel P Robert. 2016. Monitoring and Trust in Virtual Teams. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-Supported 

Cooperative Work & Social Computing - CSCW ’16, 244–258. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820076 

[68]  Ellen  Rusman,  Jan  van  Bruggen,  Peter  Sloep,  Martin  Valcke,  and  Rob  Koper.  2013.  The  Mind’s  Eye  on  Personal  Profiles:  A 
Cognitive  Perspective  on  Profile  Elements  that  Inform  Initial  Trustworthiness  Assessments  and  Social  Awareness  in  Virtual 
Project Teams. Comput. Support. Coop. Work 22, 2–3 (April 2013), 159–179. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-012-9171-5 
[69]  Michael Sauder and Wendy Nelson Espeland. 2009. The Discipline of Rankings: Tight Coupling and Organizational Change. Am. 

Sociol. Rev. 74, 1 (February 2009), 63–82. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/000312240907400104 

[70]  Robert  P.  Schumaker,  Osama  K.  Solieman,  and  Hsinchun  Chen.  2010.  Data  Sources  for  Sports.  Sports Data Mining.  Springer, 

Boston, MA, 23–28. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-6730-5_3 

[71]  Kenneth B. Shores, Yilin He, Kristina L. Swanenburg, Robert Kraut, and John Riedl. 2014. The identification of deviance and its 
impact on  retention  in  a multiplayer  game.  In  Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & 
social computing - CSCW ’14, 1356–1365. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531724 

[72]  T. L. Taylor. 2006. Play between worlds: exploring online game culture (First Edit ed.). MIT Press. 
[73]  T. L Taylor. 2012. Raising the stakes: e-sports and the professionalization of computer gaming. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mass. 
[74]  Erik H. Trainer, Ban Al-Ani, and David F. Redmiles. 2011. Impact of collaborative traces on trustworthiness. In Proceeding of the 
’11,  40–47. 

international  workshop  on  Cooperative  and  human  aspects  of  software  engineering 

-  CHASE 

4th 
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1984642.1984649 

[75]  Shawn  Tseng  and  B.  J.  Fogg.  1999.  Credibility  and  computing  technology.  Commun.  ACM  42,  5  (May  1999),  39–44. 

DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/301353.301402 

[76]  Pete Volk. 2016. League of Legends now boasts over 100 million monthly active players worldwide. riftherald.com. Retrieved from 

http://www.riftherald.com/2016/9/13/12865314/monthly-lol-players-2016-active-worldwide 

[77]  Michael G Wagner. 2006. On the Scientific Relevance of eSports. In International Conference on Internet Computing. 
[78]  Max Weber. 1978. Economy and society : an outline of interpretive sociology. University of California Press. 
[79]  Jennifer R. Whitson. 2013. Gaming the Quantified Self. Surveill. Soc. 11, 1/2 (May 2013), 163–176. 
[80]  Nick Yee. 2006. The Labor of Fun: How Video Games Blur the Boundaries of Work and Play. Games Cult. 1, 1 (January 2006), 68–

71. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/1555412005281819 

Received April 2018; revised July 2018; accepted September 2018.  

Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol. 2, No. CSCW, Article 93, Publication date: November 2018. 

 
 
 
