Exploring the Value of Parent-Tracked Baby Data in 
Interactions with Healthcare Professionals:  
A Data-Enabled Design Exploration 

Janne van Kollenburg1,2, Sander Bogers2,1, Heleen Rutjes2, Eva Deckers1,  
Joep Frens2, Caroline Hummels2  

1 Philips Design, 
Eindhoven, the Netherlands 
janne.van.kollenburg@philips.com 

2 Eindhoven University of Technology, 
Eindhoven, the Netherlands 
s.j.a.bogers@tue.nl 

ABSTRACT 
This paper presents a designerly exploration of the potential 
values  of  parent-tracked  baby  data  in  interactions  between 
parents  and  healthcare  professionals  (HCPs).  Where 
previous  work  has  used  parent-tracked  data  as  part  of  the 
solution to a problem, we contribute by starting our design 
exploration  from  data,  using  it  as  creative  material  in  our 
design process. As we intend to work towards a system that 
could  be  viable  across  different  levels  of  care,  we  invited 
three  different  types  of  HCPs  and  five  families  with 
newborns,  for  a  five-week  situated  design  exploration. 
Facilitated by an open and dynamic data collection toolkit, 
parents  and  HCPs  could  together  decide  what  data  to 
collect.  In  a  continuous  dialogue,  they  reflected  on  the 
relevance of that data in their interaction. Based on this, we 
continuously and remotely developed two concepts.  

Author Keywords 
Data-enabled  Design;  Healthcare  Professionals;  Babies; 
Parents; Health; Data; Exploration; Personal Informatics. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.2. User Interfaces. 

INTRODUCTION 
Personal  informatics  systems  [24,  9] gather  data  about our 
behavior,  facilitate  interpretation  of  the  data,  and  thereby 
help us in gaining a better understanding of ourselves (e.g. 
Fitbit [11], Nokia Health [31], Apple HealthKit [3]). When 
applied  in  the  healthcare  domain,  personal  informatics 
systems  can  be  valuable  enablers  of  patient-provider 
collaboration  [14,16,19,28].  These  can  support  diagnosis; 
personalize  treatment;  increase  patient  motivation  and 
accountability;  highlight  unarticulated  patient  goals;  and 
facilitate  visit  management  [5,  6].  However,  commercially 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work 
owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is 
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions 
from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada. 
© 2018 ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5620-6/18/04...$15.00. 
 https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173871 

Figure 1: the uGrow baby app 

available  personal  informatics  systems  are  generally  not 
developed  with  a  healthcare  professional  perspective  in 
mind  and  thereby  often  lack  mechanisms  for  effective 
communication, 
in  overwhelmed  healthcare 
professionals (HCPs) and frustrated patients [7, 41].  

resulting 

(figure  1). 

The  uGrow  baby  development  tracker  app,  launched  by 
Philips in 2016, is a personal informatics system  that aims 
to  help  new  parents  in  understanding  and  supporting  their 
baby’s  healthy  development 
It  provides 
personalized  feedback,  advises  on  what  to  expect  at  each 
stage  of  development,  and  gives  assurance 
that  the 
development of the baby is on track. This is driven by the 
data collected through manual trackers in the app (e.g., how 
long  the  baby  sleeps,  how  much  the  baby  is  eating)  or 
through  a  range  of  automated  loggers  in  the  form  of 
connected  products  (e.g.  Philips  Avent  [34]  smart  ear 
thermometer, smart baby monitor).  

As part of the uGrow innovation team at Philips Design, we 
see  potential 
in  bringing  parent-tracked  baby  data 
[12,26,30,33] into interactions with healthcare professionals 
(HCPs),  yet  a  direct  transfer  of  uGrow  (developed  for 
family  use)  to  the  healthcare  domain  would  likely  be 
unsuccessful.  We  therefore  set  out  to  explore,  in  a 
designerly manner, what and how parent-tracked baby data 
can  be  of  value  in  the  interaction  between  parents  and 
HCPs. 

In  our  data-enabled  design  approach  [4],  we  use  situated 
explorations  with  remote  design  interventions  to  translate 

CHI 2018 Honourable MentionCHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 297Page 1 
 
 
 
 
 
insights  into  new  designs  continuously.  To  do  this,  we 
shape  a  playground  of  physical  data  loggers  and  screen-
based  dashboards,  enabling  parents  and  HCPs  to  explore 
together what data is of interest and how it can be relevant 
in  their  specific  use  cases.  By  making  changes  to  the 
playground  –  or  data-enabled  canvas  –  inspired  by 
contextualized insights, the design researchers continuously 
make new ideas experiential.  

In this paper, we first outline and reflect on previous work, 
both  in  the  domain  of  parent-tracked  data  for  HCPs  and 
self-tracked data for HCPs in general. These insights helped 
in  shaping  the  initial  setup  of  our  ‘data-enabled  design 
canvas’. Based on our design exploration with  three HCPs 
and  five  families  over  five  weeks,  we  describe  how 
different  insights  have  led  iteratively  to  new  design 
implementations.  Finally,  the  paper  discusses  our  findings 
and  how  our  approach  has 
these.  The 
contribution of this paper is found in how data is used as a 
creative  material  in  the  process  of  design  for  interaction 
between parents and HCPs. 

influenced 

RELATED WORK   
The related work we outline here falls into two categories: 
(1) case studies that operate in the same application domain 
as  our  work,  and  (2)  other  approaches  to  self-tracked  data 
and  HCPs  in  other  healthcare  domains.  We  used  the 
insights from these case studies as inspiration for our design 
exploration,  and  reflect  on  their  approaches  to  inform 
construction of our own. These particular case studies were 
selected  as  we  see  them  as  representative  of  a  larger  body 
of work in this research area.  

(1) Health technologies in parent-HCP interactions 
The projects Baby Steps [18] and @Baby Steps [38] show a 
new approach to existing development assessment surveys, 
used for preventative care, which are not reliably completed 
by  parents.  This  software  tool  helps  parents  to  remember 
and  record  developmental  milestones  on  a  daily  basis. 
Design  recommendations  highlight 
to 
design for limited anxiety by mixing more serious medical-
related features with lightweight features, such as capturing 
the milestone of a first haircut.  

importance 

the 

For aiding diagnosis in higher levels of care, the MediCubes 
[39]  project  shows 
the  value  of  bringing  playful 
technology-aided diagnostic tools to the home context. The 
child’s health is monitored via a set of noninvasive sensors 
placed  on  the  toy  (e.g.  measuring  pulse,  temperature  and 
lung  capacity)  while  interacting  with  a  storytelling  game. 
Monitoring  the  child’s  health  in  their  natural  environment 
can lead to better health assessments, since the examination 
is decoupled from the data-gathering process, and thus any 
anxiety relating to the examination no longer influences the 
data collected. 

in 
The  ENSURE 
automatically  recording,  retrieving  and  transferring  health 
information (related to medication adherence) to their HCP. 

supports  parents 

concept 

[32] 

The concept was an answer to the needs of parents finding 
it  difficult  to  adhere  to  medical  advice  and  prescription 
regimens due to having hectic lives, and the need of HCPs 
to  make  effective  use  of  consultation  time.  The  work 
highlights  that  data  collecting  technologies  in  the  home 
caregivers 
consider  multiple 
context 
(e.g. 
timings  of  care. 
locations  and 
babysitters),  multiple 
Additionally, 
it  argues  for  easy  data  collection  via 
automated trackers (e.g. smart thermometer with automated 
temperature  history),  and  a  comprehensive  yet  clear  data 
overview for HCPs to make consultation more efficient. 

should 

Conclusion: 
Previous  work  shows  how  parent-tracked  baby  data, 
collected at home, has potential value across multiple levels 
of  care,  from  prevention  to  diagnosis  and  treatment. 
However,  all  case  studies  in  this  domain  start  from  pre-
defined challenges and needs. They define a specific set of 
data  as  part  of  the  solution  to  the  problem,  and  parents’ 
and/or HCPs’ experience  of the  solution  is  then  evaluated. 
Building  on  our  previous  experience  designing 
the 
connected  baby  bottle,  we  were  curious  to  find  out  what 
would happen if we again took the (parent-tracked) data as 
a starting point instead of concrete needs. We expected this 
to result in a variety of use cases and pitfalls of data usage 
not yet identified in previous work. 

(2)  Explorations  starting  from  data  in  other  healthcare 
domains 
When  broadening  our  perspective  to  work  that  explores 
how  home-collected  data  can  be  valuable  in  interactions 
with HCPs which are not specific to babies, we see a larger 
body of work that does start with the data itself. 

Mentis  et  al  [28]  present  a  case  study  that  explores  the 
value of Fitbit step count data in a clinical visit. They stress 
that when self-tracking is brought into a clinical consult, the 
data is reshaped by the goals and expertise that exist within 
that  healthcare  framework  [29].  Building  a  common 
understanding of the data requires work by both the patient 
and the clinician, as it is shaped and co-interpreted by both 
[1,13,15,17,35].  The  approach  whereby  patient  and 
clinician  build  a  shared  understanding  of  the  data  (e.g.  by 
discussing  outliers)  provides  a  valuable  additional  layer  of 
meaning to the data.  

The  Fitbit  data  used  by  Mentis  et  al  is  a  clear  example  of 
how the domain of self-tracking and quantified-self shows a 
clear  trend  from  manual  tracking  towards  automated  or 
passive  tracking.  Challenges  that  are  often  associated  with 
manual tracking in the healthcare domain include: (1) that it 
is more difficult to maintain manual logging because of the 
higher burden [40,21], and (2) that the data is less reliable 
than data collected automatically [20].  

However,  Yamashita  et  al  [40]  highlight  that  manually 
logging  data  can  be  advantageous  as  it  can  lead  to  more 
careful  self-observation,  which  increases  self-awareness 
and  engagement  [23,25].  Their  study,  which  was  designed 

CHI 2018 Honourable MentionCHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 297Page 2to explore the value of manually tracked data for caregivers, 
focused  on  a  manual  mood-tracking  system  for  family 
caregivers caring for a depressed family member. The study 
found  that  it  helped  the  caregivers  gain  better  insight  into 
the  behavior  of  the  care  recipient,  for  example,  and  to 
develop concrete action plans.  

Conclusion: 
Although  not  in  the  domain  of  baby  care,  there  are  clear 
examples of studies that depart from data  rather than from 
problems  and  needs.  The  direct  insights  are  arguably  less 
valuable  to  us,  as  they  are  heavily  influenced  by  their 
context. The approach, however, is of interest. In the Fitbit 
case  study,  the  building  of  a  shared  understanding  of  the 
data  by  patients  together  with  clinicians  is  of  value.  Even 
though the study started from exploring the potential value 
of data, it were the researchers who defined what data was 
used.  A  similar  argument  could  be  made  for  Yamashita’s 
case study, as the application provided a fixed template for 
what  data  to  manually  keep  track  of.  Although  we  have 
only  highlighted  a  limited  number  of  cases,  we  have  not 
found case studies that do not pre-define the data involved. 
As we set out to use data as creative material to inspire our 
design  iterations,  we  argue  for  a  more  open  and  dynamic 
approach, as described in the following section.  

DATA-ENABLED DESIGN (METHOD) 
We  build  on  our  data-enabled  design  approach  [4]  to 
explore  what  data  is  valuable  in  what  way.  This  approach 
was developed and described at an earlier stage, based on a 
design  exploration  of  a  connected  baby  bottle.  The 
approach is outlined below, after which we elucidate how it 
was used in the case.  

Data-enabled design sets out to use data as creative material 
from the early stages of the design process to ascertain new 
design directions. This is very different from a data-driven 
design approach [8], in which data is used as evidence for 
design decisions (i.e. in AB testing). Discussions about the 
data  become  far  more  personal  and  detailed  if  the  data  is 
real  and  belongs  to  an  individual  [22].  We  use  a 
combination  of  sensor  data  to  gain  detailed  insights  in 
behavioral patterns and qualitative methods for providing a 
detailed 
experiences. 
Consequently, the data-enabled explorations are situated in 
a  real-life  context,  for  a  longer  period  of  time.  We 
deliberately refer to these as ‘situated explorations’ because 
they  are  not  static  validations,  field  trials  or  home 
placement tests.  

understanding 

related 

of 

Data  is  used  as  a  means  to  collect  insights  remotely  and 
continuously, but also to remotely design interventions. For 
example,  in  the  connected  baby  bottle  case,  bottle  feeding 
data was remotely collected and displayed in real time on a 
researcher  data-dashboard.  This  screen-based  interface 
displayed  data  visualizations  that  gave  insight  into  the 
behavior, experiences and context of the participants. Based 
on  insights  from  this  data,  content  was  then  sent  to  a 
connected mobile app.  

The playground that is shaped through all the tools involved 
(e.g.  physical  and  digital  prototypes,  software  platforms, 
apps,  researchers’  dashboards)  is  what  we  refer  to  as  the 
data-enabled  canvas.  The  data-enabled  canvas  facilitates 
the  explorative  and  open  nature  of  this  approach.  It  is 
designed  to  be  sufficiently  open  to  facilitate  a  variety  of 
explorations,  based  on  the  insights  gained  during  the 
situated explorations. These cannot be planned upfront, and 
thus  will  continuously  change.  Our  data  canvas  needs  to 
grow together with our solution to enable continuity of the 
design  explorations  [37].  More  simply  put,  by  collecting 
and  showing  data  to  participants,  they  come  up  with  new 
questions or ideas. From a distance, we can quickly update 
elements  of  the  data  canvas  to  embody  these  ideas,  and 
participants  can  then  experience  them.  These  again  trigger 
new ideas for participants and researchers. In this way, we 
can explore continuously and remotely. 

DESIGN CASE 
Our  design  case  in  this  paper  is  a  data-enabled  design 
exploration of how baby data collected in the home can be 
valuable  in  the  interaction between parents and  HCPs.  For 
our  situated  explorations  we  invited  three  HCPs  from  the 
Netherlands.  As  we  set  out  to  design  for  a  system  that  is 
valuable  across  different  levels  of  care,  we  invited  (1)  a 
consultation  office  nurse,  who  takes  a  preventative  and 
informative  role  in  screening  the  overall  health  and 
development  of  children,  executing  vaccinations  and 
providing  parenting  strategies;  (2)  a  general  practitioner, 
who helps parents in solving common medical conditions or 
refers them to a specialist in a higher level of care; and (3) a 
pediatrician, who is there for newborns that need specialist 
treatment in hospitals or other medical services.  

The three HCPs were each asked to recruit two families to 
participate  in  the  study  for  five  weeks  (see  table  1). 
Families  involved  in  current,  ongoing  treatment  with  the 
pediatrician were excluded, as from a medical ethical point 
of  view  we  did  not  want  to  interfere  with  diagnosis  or 
treatment of severe issues. The pediatrician had difficulty in 
recruiting  families,  and  so  started  the  study  supervising 
only  one  family.  However,  Family  4  was,  coincidentally, 
referred  to  the  pediatrician  by  the  GP  during  the  situated 
explorations; hence, all HCPs interacted with two families. 
When  referring  to  participants  hereafter,  we  refer  to  all 
participating families and HCPs. This setup was positively 
evaluated in a Philips internal ethical committee board and 
the  Dutch  Medical  Ethical  Committee  at  Maxima  Medical 
Center [27].  

Part  of  our  data-enabled  design  approach  was  to  shape  a 
data-enabled canvas that allowed us to gain insights, and to 
respond  to  these  insights  in  a  continuous  manner  through 
design  interventions.  This  meant  that  after  two  weeks  the 
canvas could be completely different for Family 1 than for 
Family  5.  As  a  whole,  our  data-enabled  canvas  comprised 
of  (1)  a  family  toolkit;  (2)  a  healthcare  professional 
dashboard; and (3) a researcher dashboard.  

CHI 2018 Honourable MentionCHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 297Page 3 
(CON) Consultation 
Office Nurse 

(P) Pediatrician  

(GP) General 
Practitioner  

Family 1 

Family 2 

Family 3 

Family 4 

Family 5 

Baby: 5w 
Father: 37 
Mother: 34 

Baby: 3w 
Father: 33 
Mother: 32 

Baby: 5m 
Father: 35 
Mother: 34  
Sister: 3y 

Baby: 3m 
Father: 27 
Mother: 26 

Baby: 6w 
Father: 37 
Mother: 30 

High level of 
education 
No health 
issues 
Preventative 
focus 

High level of 
education 
Born 
lightweight 
Focus on 
growth 

Middle level 
of education 
Was 
hospitalized 
Issue solved, 
prevention 

Middle level 
of education 
Excessive 
crying 
Unraveling 
cause 

Middle level 
of education 
Reflux 

Lowering 
medication 

Two home 
visits of CON 
Handwritten 
diary 

Two home 
visits of CON 
Babytracker 
app 

6 consults & 
hospitalized 
No tracking 
of data 

Family is 2 
years with GP 
No tracking 
of data 

Family is 1,5 
years with GP 
Handwritten 
diary 

Table 1. Overview of participating healthcare professionals 
and families with ages, education levels, health problem, care 
focus, patient-provider relationship, and data experience. 

A data-enabled canvas 
The  domain  of  home-collected  (baby)  data  is  heavily 
connoted  with  apps,  screen  interfaces  and  quantified  self 
products.  We  aimed  to  enable  participants  to  think  freely 
about  the  possible  benefits  of  sharing  data  with  HCPs, 
instead of what the next great app (feature) could be.  

(1) Family Toolkit 
By  introducing  a  physical  ‘family  toolkit’  for  parents,  as 
part  of  our  data-enabled  canvas,  we  aimed  to  position 
ourselves outside of  the digital only frame of reference.  In 
addition, we hoped that the physicality of the loggers made 
them stand out in the home context, so that everyone (e.g. 
mother, father, grandmother, sister, nanny) could decide to 
keep track of things, instead of only those who had the app 
installed on their phone. Especially in the context of family 
care where, for example, grandparents and daycare are also 
responsible  for  the  care  of  the  baby,  it  would  be  a  missed 
opportunity not to include them in data collection. 

The family toolkit (figures 2 & 5) can facilitated a dialogue 
between the parents and the HCPs through data collected at 
home.  As  related  work  has  given  little  insight  into  what 
data may be relevant for parents to keep track of (let alone 
how this could be tracked), the toolkit does not define this. 
Instead,  it  is  set  up  as  a  multi-purpose  and  dynamic  set  of 
tools for parents and HCPs to use in a way they see fit. The 
toolkit consisted of (a) a collection of physical data loggers 
and (b) a parent dashboard displayed on a touchscreen (see 
figure 2).  

The  physical  data  loggers  are  generic,  internet-connected, 
manual  trackers  (see  figure  3)  that  could  be  placed 
anywhere  the  parents  wanted.  Every  data  logger  has  a 
different  interaction  style,  resulting  in  different  types  of 
data  (see  table  2).  Using  the  parent  dashboard,  parents 
could,  together  with  their  HCP,  define  what  the  physical 
loggers would be used for. For example, if they decided it  

Figure 2. The family toolkit. Clockwise from bottom-left: text 
module, video module, rotating knob, push button (in hand), 
parent dashboard. 

Was valuable to keep track of how often a baby was being 
fed, they could use the parent dashboard to assign the label 
‘feeding’  to  the  push  button.  From  that  point  onwards, 
when  the  push  button  was  pressed,  a  new  ‘feeding’  event 
would  be  recorded.  The  assigned  labels  could  be  freely 
changed at any point in time. All recorded events would be 
displayed on the parent and HCP dashboard as a simple log 
of all events (figure 4). In addition, a message center in all 
dashboards  allowed  communication  between  the  parents, 
HCPs and design researchers.   

It  is  important  to  note  that  the  physical  loggers  were 
deliberately  designed  to  be  used  for  a  single  purpose. 
Hence,  it  would  be  impossible  for  parents  to  start  logging 
everything;  they  had  to  make  conscious  decisions  on  what 
data was most relevant.  

Data logger 

Functionality 

(a) push-button module 

saves when it is pressed 

(b) rotation-knob module 

saves  when  it  is  pressed  and  at 
what position (from 0 to 100) 

(c) video module 

saves short videos (max. 5 mins) 

(d) text module 

saves text messages  

Table 2. Overview of physical data loggers, with functionality  

Not only did we envision the physical trackers to be open-
ended, we also designed the underlying technology in a way 
that  would  allow  us  to  quickly  design  and  introduce  new 
physical  data  loggers.  The  smaller  cylindrical  loggers  (A, 
B)  were  built  using  the  same  hardware  platform  (i.e. 
ESP8266 [10] with custom-designed printed circuit board). 
They  were  battery  operated  and  could  run  for  more  than 
five  weeks  without  a  recharge;  they  were  also  wireless, 
enabling  parents  to  place  them  at  a  convenient  place 
associated with the event (e.g. putting a ‘wet diaper’ logger 
next  to  the  diaper  changing  table).  Loggers  C  and  D  were 

CHI 2018 Honourable MentionCHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 297Page 4 
 
built  using  Android  phones,  and  could  be  used  wirelessly 
and charged, but only had a battery lifespan of about a day.  

Figure 3. The physical data loggers 

Figure 4. Different elements of the HCP dashboard: (A) data 
filters for the HCP; (B) visualization of the audio tracker 
(introduced later); (C) data logs of the physical trackers; (D) 
annotations on data points.  

(2) HCP Dashboard 
In  the  system,  each  family  was  connected  to  their  HCP, 
giving  the  HCP  access  to  that  family’s  data.  As  with  the 
parent dashboard, the HCP dashboard initially displays the 
logbook  (figure  4),  but  also  offers  some  additional  filters 
and  controls  to  zoom  in/out  to  discover  relations  and 
patterns  (figure  4-A).  The  HCP  also  has  access  to  the 
messaging interface. 

(3) Researcher Dashboard 
The design researchers had access to the data of all families 
and HCPs. As well as having a copy of the HCP dashboard, 
the  researcher  dashboard  contains  more  experimental  data 
visualizations  and  some  metadata  (when  participants  visit 
the  dashboard)  to  gain  insight  into  the  current  exploration. 
It  can  also  be  used  to  communicate  with  the  participants 
and as a place to try out new features before going ‘live’. 

Figure 5. The 5 toolkits handed out to families 

Procedure 
The  situated  explorations  were  planned  to  run  for  five 
weeks  for  all  participants.  Participants  were  phased  in  at 
different times to allow for any technical immaturities at the 
start,  and  to  provide  more  time  for  new  explorations.  The 
study  therefore  ran  for  nine  weeks  in  total.  We  hereafter 
refer  to  week  numbers  in  relation  to  the  starting  date  of 
each  participant  (i.e.  week  1  of  Family  1  will  have  a 
different date range to week 1 of Family 3).  

– For families  
In  the  introductory  meeting  at  the  family’s  home,  we 
introduced the purpose of the study and the functionality of 
the toolkit (figure 6). To help them become acquainted with 
how to log data and change the labels assigned to the data 
loggers, the parents were asked to label each module, based 
on  what  they  thought  could  be  useful  to  keep  track  of.  In 
this  way,  we  quickly  learned  about  aspects  that  are  of 
(temporal)  relevance  for  them  to  discuss  with  their  HCPs. 
We explained that the toolkit allows for quick updates, and 
so encouraged them to actively think and make suggestions 
that we could respond to.  

In the second week, a session was held with the parents in 
which  we  discussed  their  first  experiences.  In  the  weeks 
thereafter,  there  were  only  contact  moments  when  specific 
issues arose (e.g. technical malfunctioning, questions about 
the  study,  changing  health  condition  of  the  baby  requiring 
exclusion from the study).  

In the fifth (i.e. final) week, we met with the families twice. 
The first meeting was a session at home to reflect on their 
experiences,  and  to  discuss  their  perspective  on  the 
relevance  of  home-collected  baby  data  for  themselves  and 
their HCPs. The second was in a consult with the HCP and 
design  researchers,  where  they  shared  and  discussed 
experiences and asked any remaining questions.  

– For healthcare professionals 
In an introductory meeting at the HCP’s office, the purpose 
and  setup  of  the  study  was  explained.  Both  the  family 
toolkit  and  the  HCP  dashboard  were  introduced.  To  give 
HCPs  a  better  understanding  of  the  potential  opportunities 
of  the  family  toolkit,  the  researchers  gave  some  hands-on 

CHI 2018 Honourable MentionCHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 297Page 5 
 
 
demos. Once every week the researchers visited the HCP to 
review the data collected by their families through the HCP 
dashboard, and to discuss new ideas. We explained that we 
intended  to  design  and  explore  ‘on-the-fly’,  meaning  that 
things  would  continuously  change  as  their  ideas  and 
feedback were directly implemented.   

In  general,  the  system  was  very  well  received.  Initially, 
parents struggled with defining which labels to assign to the 
physical  loggers,  as  the  system  was  so  open  that  it  was 
challenging to find a starting point.  

“I  am  doubting  what  kind  of  information  I  should  collect: 
information  around  my  questions  of  care  or  information  about 
everything I do? I would like to have answers to my questions but 
think  it  might  also  be  interesting  to  have  the  HCP  access  my 
routines.  There  might  be  aspects  which  I  find  normal  but  which 
the consultation officers find striking.” – Family 1 

After  using  the  system  for  several  days,  and  as  a  result  of 
interactions with their HCP, this became clearer. From this 
point onwards, the parents started to enthusiastically collect 
extensive datasets. 

Figure 6. The family toolkit installed during the situated 
explorations 

– For design researchers 
In  a  weekly  design  meeting,  all  results  and  insights  from 
interviews  and  dashboard  reviews  were  discussed.  These 
ranged  from  participant  quotes  and  study  questions  to 
technical  difficulties  or  bug  fixes.  When  participants  sent 
messages  using  their  dashboard  message  center,  we  aimed 
to  respond  within  a  couple  of  hours.  Based  on  these 
insights, the team would collectively brainstorm and decide 
which  actions  and  new  designs  would  have  the  largest 
priority. The designs would balance the questions and ideas 
from  the  participants  with  the  ideas  of  the  design  team, 
based on their insights.  

resulting 

SITUATED EXPLORATIONS 
In  this  section,  we  share  two  design  narratives  which 
describe the evolution of our situated explorations, and the 
rich  and  detailed  stories  that  have  driven  them.  These 
narratives  are  formed  from  a  study  timeline  where, 
throughout  the  exploration,  we  tracked  user  behavior  and 
experiences, 
design 
interventions.  As  most  design  interventions  were  directly 
connected  to  one  or  more  insights  resulting  from  other 
design 
the  design 
narratives  throughout  the  situated  explorations.  Where 
relevant, we use reflection on action, as described by Schön 
[36], to describe the design narratives. From a collection of 
multiple narratives, we selected those that lead to the more 
concrete design concepts. 

they  clearly  show 

interventions, 

insights 

new 

and 

Cumulatively,  families  participated  for  127  days  over  a 
period  of  nine  weeks.  In  total,  we  collected  1372  data 
entries from the physical data loggers, which were divided 
over  25  different  assigned  labels.  The  HCPs  typed  20 
messages to families. We sat together with participants for a 
total  of  36  hours,  and  made  changes  to  the  data-enabled 
canvas continuously.  

Although  very  curious,  the  HCPs  were  more  reluctant  at 
first. It was not immediately clear how the data could help 
them, as it was hard to imagine what the parents would use 
the  data  loggers  for.  This  quickly  changed  once  they 
received  real  data,  as  this  gave  them  a  better  idea  of  what 
access  to  the  data  could mean for them, and what changes 
were  required  to  move  towards  that.  We  present  two 
distinct  directions,  as 
the  general 
practitioner  and  pediatrician  showed  large  similarities  but 
were unlike the insights from the consultation office nurse.  

insights  from 

the 

A  design  narrative  towards  My  Care  Question  (for  the 
consultation office nurse) 
The  families  started  to  collect  data  before  having  data-
related  interaction  with  their  consultation  office  nurse.  At 
this level of preventative care, the issues are less prominent 
and  the  parents  found  it  difficult  to  pinpoint  what  data  to 
collect. Consequently, they began with the most commonly 
tracked  data:  feeding  and  sleeping.  Parents  were  very 
dedicated to tracking this repetitive information accurately, 
as they valued a complete overview.   

“Sometimes I click the button twice as I forgot to log the previous 
one. But that doesn’t show the real situation.” – Family 2 

As  this  seemed  an  important  value,  we  introduced  the 
ability to manually add data points at a certain time (in the 
past) and the ability to delete (wrong) data points (figure 4). 
To  achieve  this,  we  integrated  a  comment  option  for  each 
data point. Parents could use the comment facility to record 
what was wrong with a given data point and what needed to 
be  changed.  This  was  visible  to  the  design  research  team, 
who initially updated the data manually.   

“I am so pleased with the adaption possibilities. When I forget it 
in  the  middle  of  the  night  and  enter  the  data  in  the  morning,  it 
automatically  ‘jumps’  to  the  right  position  on  the  timeline  –  so 
nice.”  – Family 3 

After the first weeks, the consultation office nurse received 
extensive overviews of accurately tracked data in the form 
of a timeline. There was so much data that it took the HCP 
about 30 minutes to go through it. At many points she saw 
something  she  thought  could  be  worth  giving  feedback 

CHI 2018 Honourable MentionCHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 297Page 6 
about,  however,  she  also  did  not  want  to  worry  parents 
about something that was not causing any problems.  

and  the  HCP  receives  the  list  of  questions  with  associated 
data.   

“I am doubting. I see a lot of data that I could respond to, 
but I’m hesitant to do so as I do not want to create issues or 
concerns that are not there.” – Consultation Office Nurse 

The My Care Question module was introduced to Family 2 
two  weeks  before  the  end  of  the  situated  explorations,  It 
immediately proved its relevance, as shown below.  

The nurse made a case for easier browsing through the data, 
as this could significantly speed up the task of reviewing it. 
We therefore implemented data filters so that irrelevant data 
could be hidden.  

In  the  meantime,  the  parents  continued  to  track  the  same 
data but also started to use the comments facility. Although 
intended as a workaround for manual data adjustment, they 
also  used  comments  to  give  more  qualitative  information 
about  the  data  they  collected.  As  the  comments  were 
previously  only  visible  to  the  design  research  team,  we 
quickly enabled the HCP to  not only see them, but also to 
write new comments.  

As a comment on “sleep” by the parent  –“Baby went to sleep at 
21:00, after a feed at 18:30 we took a shower, baby was awake in 
my arms. In his crib he cried a lot, fell asleep in my arms in the 
nursing room, then I put him to bed in the nursing room.–Family 1  

The comment above shows the ‘obvious’ first data tracked 
by the family becoming more detailed and nuanced through 
the  addition  of  context  and  personal  experiences.  As  the 
HCP started to gain a better understanding of what the data 
might  bring,  she  started  to  ask  for  other  details  that  could 
provide more contextual insight. Together, the HCP and the 
family  decided  to  start  tracking  the  ‘easiness  of  falling 
asleep’, using the rotation knob. After doing this for several 
days,  based  on  whether  her  experience  of  ‘falling  asleep 
peacefully’  matched  what can be  expected of  a  five-week-
old baby, the HCP discussed this with the parents further.  

Although  the  consultation  office  nurse  was  now  equipped 
with  a  dashboard  that  allowed  for  easier  filtering  of  data 
and  had  a  better  contextual  understanding  of  the  data 
through  the  comments  from  the  parents,  she  still  clearly 
struggled  with  the  large  amount  of  data  and  how  to  deal 
with  it.  In  contrast  to  her  normal  approach,  where  parents 
ask  questions  and  she  tries  to  answer  them,  there  now 
seemed to be an expectation for her to give advice without a 
clear  question.  She  clearly  appreciated  it  when  a  concrete 
question  appeared  in  one  of  the  comments,  and  explained 
that  she  always  used  a  question-based  approach  whereby 
parents explained what was on their mind and she would try 
to find a solution.  

Inspired by this, we built the ‘My Care Question’ concept. 
This  is  a  different  tab/window  in  the  parent  dashboard 
where  new  questions  can  be  initialized  and  data  points 
(historic or to be collected) can be selected, where the data 
points  are  relevant  for  the  HCP  to  better  help  with  the 
question  (i.e.  the  question  module  provided  a  filter  on  the 
data  set  by  the  parents  for  the  HCP).  Based  on  the  data 
points, the system creates a simple data summary overview, 

Figure 7. An example question asked in the My Care Question 
module. At the top, the question is formulated (A). Next, the 
relevant data types can be selected, using a number of filters 
(B). A simple summary data visual is then shown (C), followed 
by all data points (D).  

The  mother  of  Family  2  used  the  new  My  Care  Question 
module  to  ask  how  she  could  increase  her  breastfeeding 
supply  through  expressing  (i.e.  pumping)  (figure  7).  She 
connected data about the duration and volume of expressing 
to the question. As this clearly illustrated a highly irregular 
routine  during  that  time,  the  consultation  office  nurse 
advised  her  to  pump  delicately  every  two  hours  for  two 
days.  Unfortunately,  that  advice  did  not  have  the  desired 
effect (also visible in the data). 

“After  29  years  of  experience,  I  have  not  often  experienced  that 
breastmilk amounts do not increase [after giving this advice].” – 
Consultation Office Nurse 

To  find  suitable  advice,  the  consultation  office  nurse 
reached out to a lactation consultant. She communicated the 
new  advice  through  the  My  Care  Question  module,  and  it 
had  a  positive  effect.  In  the  reflective  session,  both  the 
mother  and  the  consultation  office  nurse  reported  being 
very satisfied with the functionality of the module. 

“Now I get much more information (...). Maybe, when you [mum] 
had  seen  me  two  weeks  after,  you  might  have  already  stopped 

CHI 2018 Honourable MentionCHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 297Page 7 
expressing.  You  might  have  thought  ‘this  isn’t  working  out’  and 
maybe  you  would  have  switched  to  bottle  feeding  already.  [mum 
confirms]” – Consultation Office Nurse 

A  design  narrative  towards  Care  Paths  (for  the  GP  and 
pediatrician) 
When  the  parents  received  the  toolkits,  we  encouraged 
them to start logging  the data they expected to be relevant 
for  them  in  interactions  with  their  HCP.  Compared  to  the 
families  participating  with  the  consultation  office  nurse, 
these  families  found  it  a  little  easier  to  define  what  their 
data  loggers  would  collect  as  there  was  a  clearer  issue  at 
hand. They appreciated the fact that they were now able to 
keep track of a problem so that their HCP would “see what 
our baby is going through” (Family 5).  

After the first week, the data collected by the families was 
presented  to  the  GP  and  pediatrician  in  the  form  of  a 
logbook  of  events  (figure  4).  Both  professionals  struggled 
to  make  sense  of  the  data.  It  was  difficult  to  get  an 
overview  as  an  extensive  set  of  data  had  already  been 
collected.  We  agreed  that  this  was  probably  the  case 
because having an overview alongside the ability to look at 
the  data  from  different  angles  was  necessary,  but  widely 
missing.  In  response,  we  developed  the  first  version  of  a 
timeline  data  visualization,  for  the  HCP  dashboard  (see 
figure 8).  

Figure 8. Data visualization, first version. The color of the dots 
is mapped to the type of physical data logger used.  

The  new  visualization  did  not  provide  a  solution  to  the 
issues  highlighted  during  the  first  meeting.  It  was  still 
difficult  for  the  HCPs  to  get  a  good  overview,  and  they 
argued  strongly  that  the  data  collected  by  the  parents  was 
way too much: they only needed to see specific things that 
could  help  to  answer  some  of  their  unanswered  questions. 
Also,  the  GP  felt  that  by  tracking  data  some  parents  may 
become  so  obsessed  with  it  that  it  had  the  potential  to 
magnify the problem. As a result, both HCPs asked parents 
to keep track of specific things.  

“I  am  a  GP,  I  only  want  to  see  information  related  to  the  care 
question.  Parents  visit  me  because  they  have  a  problem,  not  to 
show videos of how cute their baby is.” – GP 

“I  want  to  stimulate  the  family  to  make  videos  of  skin  rash  or 
uncommon behavior, that is very valuable to me. We can stop with 
tracking full (poo) diapers, and replace it by wet diapers. Also, I 
want the family to track sleep.” – Pediatrician 

Where the HCP partly found a solution to data overload by 
helping  parents  focus  on  what  data  to  collect,  we  together 

still  struggled  in  coming  up  with  more  usable  data 
visualizations.  As  the  physical  loggers  could  be  used  to 
keep track of any kind of data, our visualizations needed to 
be  abstract  representations  that  had  no  understanding  of 
context. As they had to be generic, we kept coming back to 
timeline  visualizations  that  stayed  the  same  conceptually 
but had improved readability. 

Figure 9. A new data visualization. Different days are shown 
next to each other; icons represent labels. At the top, 
cumulative charts show how often events occur. 

From  the  HCP  perspective  it  was  clear  what  kind  of  data 
was  needed  in  a  specific  case.  In  an  ideal  world  that  data 
would  be  collected  as  accurately  as  possible.  Manually 
tracked  data  had  clear  advantages,  as  it  was  open  and 
almost  anything  could  be  collected,  but 
the  HCPs 
sometimes  questioned  its  quality.  For  example,  was  there 
no feeding at a given point because there was no feeding, or 
because it was not logged?  

To  support  a  request  for  sleep  tracking  and  explore  the 
value of an automated data logger, we introduced two new 
data  loggers:  (1)  the  two-state  toggle  button,  and  (2)  the 
audio module.  

(1) The  two-state  toggle  button (figure  10) was  introduced 
to  support  the  sleep  request.  Where  the  other  buttons  only 
register an event at a particular moment in time, this button 
registers  when  it  is  in  its  pressed  state  and  thus  logs  the 
duration  of  events.  (2)  The  audio  module  (figure  10)  was 
introduced to elicit responses about automated data loggers. 
The module can be freely placed throughout the house and 
continuously keeps track of environmental sound levels and 
tone  heights.  Approximately  every 
five  hours  a 
visualization  appears  in  the  parent  and  HCP  dashboard, 
summarizing that time slot (figure 4).  

Although  the  data  in  current  form  was  hard  to  interpret 
initially,  the  parents  started  exploring  how  these  modules 
could be valuable. They came up with unexpected use cases 
and questions as to how this information could be relevant.  

Although  both  HCPs  expected  to  see  a  ‘universal  truth’ 
from the automated data collectors, it became clear that, for 

CHI 2018 Honourable MentionCHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 297Page 8 
 
 
both  the  manual  and  the  automated  loggers,  it  was 
important to build a shared understanding of what the data 
means.  Only  then  can  it  become  meaningful  for  both 
parties.  

Figure 10. The toggle button (left) and audio module (right) 

 “I wonder, if he [my baby] makes a lot of noise during the night, 
is  he  doing  that  constantly  or  only  15  minutes  before  he  wants 
food?” – Family 2  

We  see  a  good  example  of  this  in  how  Family  4  used  the 
video  module  to  annotate  the  rotation  knob.  Initially  the 
rotation knob was set to track ‘crying’. The minimum of the 
knob was manually defined as ‘whining’, and the maximum 
as  ‘screaming’.  Upon  questions  from  the  GP,  the  mother 
made  two  videos,  one  showing  whining,  and  the  other 
screaming.  Immediately,  the  GP  had  a  frame  of  reference 
for that data.  

In  short,  we  discovered  that  the  HCP  would  like  to  be  in 
control  and somehow  regulate  what  is  being kept  track of, 
to prevent parents from worrying too much. 

Building  on  this,  we  introduced  ‘Care  Paths’:  problem-
specific  care  modules.  HCPs  could  start  these  modules 
when  there  was  a  clear  indication  for  a  problem  or  a 
diagnosis  had  already  been  made.  Each  problem-specific 
module  pre-lists  a  set  of  data  points  that  are  important  for 
the  parent  to  keep  track  of.  After  the  HCP  initializes  a 
module,  the  request  shows  up  on  the  parent  dashboard. 
Upon  acceptance,  all  the  labels  for  the  physical  loggers 
automatically  update  to  those  defined  by  the  module.  For 
example, the allergies care module may ask parents to take 
a video of a skin condition, using the video module, every 
day.  As  the  Care  Path  modules  focus  on  more  specific 
issues,  they  can  also  involve  function-specific  automated 
loggers (e.g. a smart baby bottle for feeding issues). 

We implemented a Care Path reflux module during the last 
week of the situated explorations and discussed this in final 
interviews.  Although  the  HCPs  were  enthusiast  about  the 
concept, the parents were less convinced of it in its current 
form. In the current setup, they felt that what they found to 
be  valuable  was  not  integrated  enough.  This  is  clearly 
evident in the following quotes:  

“In this  case,  I just  want to  know  when the baby is fed,  when  he 
spits up and when he cries. It is as simple as that.”  – GP 

Figure 11. A care path-specific data visualization for reflux, 
showing the time between feeding and spitting up 

the  care  paths  pre-define 

Because 
the  problem  and 
concurrent  data  request,  where  the  data  gains  contextual 
value,  we  were  able  to  move  away  from  generic  timeline 
visualizations.  This  allowed  us  to  create  care  path-specific 
data visualizations that would emphasize other elements. 

Figure  11  shows  the  first  version  of  a  care  path-specific 
visualization  for  reflux.  It  shows  the  temporary  relation 
between  feeding  (in  the  center)  and  spitting  up  (the  green 
lines), compiled from data from the reflux module gathered 
by  Family  5.  From  this  visualization,  it  can  be  seen  that, 
over the previous 14 days, the baby never spat up within an 
hour  after  feeding.  We  presented  this  visualization  to  the 
GP, who quickly responded: 

“There is no spitting after a feed, only before. That doesn’t seem 
to be a reflux problem...” – GP 

Mother elaborated: “When my baby spits up, I give him a little sip 
to rinse away that disgusting taste.” – Family 5 

The  care  path-specific  data  visualization  helped  the  GP  to 
gain insight into what might be causing the baby to spit up, 
and how she could best help the family to make it better. In 
addition,  it  provided  her  with  the  tools  to  monitor 
improvement.  

Together  with  the  HCP,  we  developed  six  Care  Path 
modules, and defined what data was relevant for each one. 
However, we also learned that the set of data defined by the 
HCPs; the Care Path modules should have the flexibility to 
enable parents to track extra data points if they want to. 

DISCUSSION  
In 
this  paper,  we  presented  a  data-enabled  design 
exploration  where  we  explored,  in  context,  how  parent-
tracked  baby  data  can  be  valuable  in  the  interaction 
between  parents  and  HCPs.  We  chose  this  approach 
because  (1)  we  wanted  to  explore  what  data  could  be 
valuable, in contrast to prior work that defined this upfront; 
and  (2)  because  we  wanted  to  be  able  to  translate  our 
that  could  be 
insights 
experienced,  thus  enabling  us  to  explore  how  data  can  be 
relevant in their interactions. 

into  designs 

immediately 

“If  I  only  tracked  feeds,  spitting  up  and  crying,  I  don’t  think  the 
GP would have enough understanding of the situation. Sometimes 
my baby is not crying but clearly uncomfortable, you could notice 
that by not going to sleep.” – Family 5 

The exploration of what data is relevant 
By  enabling  parents  and  HCPs  to  have  a  continuous 
dialogue  about  what  data  was  relevant  for  them,  working 
together,  they  quickly  went  beyond  the  most  commonly 

CHI 2018 Honourable MentionCHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 297Page 9 
 
tracked  data  (e.g.  feeding,  sleeping,  diapers,  milestones). 
The  data  loggers  were  set  to  track  more  detailed  and 
nuanced activities that often provided an experiential layer 
on  top  of  the  data  [2].  The  assigned  labels  ‘easiness  of 
falling asleep’, ‘response to reflux’, and ‘position of waking 
up’  as  well  as  parents’  comments  to  data  points  are  good 
examples  of  this.  It  is  interesting  to  see  how  these  labels 
became  more  detailed  over  time,  as  the  questions  of  the 
parent  and  HCP  did.  We  would  argue  that,  had  we  started 
this exploration from existing baby apps as uGrow, without 
a  dynamic  data-enabled  canvas,  it  would  have  been  more 
difficult to go beyond this (in our eyes, superficial) layer.  

for  example,  wanted 

By  selecting  HCPs  from  different  levels  of  care,  we  were 
able  to  corroborate  our  belief  that  different  types  of 
[6].  The 
professionals  have  different  data  needs 
consultation  office  nurse, 
to 
understand  development,  while  the  pediatrician  wanted  to 
know  how  long  after  a  feeding  the  baby  would  spit  up. 
Alongside  the  differences  between  types  of  professionals, 
the  personality  of  individual  professionals  also  played  a 
role.  All  had  developed  their  own  way  of  working 
throughout  their  careers  and  preferred  that  the  data 
respected that. The open nature of the data trackers proved 
to be very valuable in allowing professionals to use them in 
a way that they saw fit.   

A critical note here is that although we clearly created more 
openness  in  what  data  was  used  than  other  case  studies  in 
this  domain  have  shown,  the  boundaries  of  what  could  be 
collected were not infinite. Through our toolkit, we created 
a  frame  of  reference  for  the  participants  that  clearly 
influenced their perspective (i.e. nobody asked for medical 
measures such as pulse or lung capacity). 

The exploration of how data can be relevant  
In  the  section  on  the  situated  explorations,  we  presented  a 
variety of real-life use cases. For example, we saw the GP 
using  manual  feeding,  spitting  up  and  crying  data  to  gain 
insight  into  potential  reflux-related  issues;  the  pediatrician 
using  video  to  monitor  allergic  skin  responses;  and  the 
consultation office nurse using breast pumping data to give 
advice  on  how  to  increase  milk  production.  Exploring 
through 
these  real-life  use  cases  gave  us  a  better 
understanding of the full complexity of the design space [5, 
7,  19,  28].  As  a  result,  we  were  not  only  able  to  identify 
certain pitfalls but could also explore how to design around 
them. For example, the GP strongly argued for limiting the 
amount  of  data  that  was  collected  by  the  families,  as  it 
would  only  make  them  more  worried  and  focused  on  the 
problem.  Our  response  to  this  was  that  the  design  of  the 
Care  Path  modules  would  only  allow  certain  types  of  data 
collection  for  a  fixed  moment  of  time.  For  example,  it 
would  only  allow  tracking  of  crying  for  two  weeks.  The 
situatedness  of  the  explorations  also  allowed  for  the 
continuous  emergence  of  inspiring  and  unexpected  use 
cases. Whereas the GP argued strongly against the logging 
of  ‘see  how  cute  my  baby  is’  videos  (and  manually 

removed  almost  all  of  them),  the  pediatrician  really 
appreciated  these.  He  argued  that  because  he  has  no 
background knowledge of the family coming to the consult, 
the videos could help him to get a rich contextual snapshot 
of the family (e.g. a chaotic household) and thereby allows 
for  advice  personalization  [32].  This  example,  again, 
reinforces the fact that different HCPs have different needs 
and different ways of working.  

At  the  start  of  the  situated  explorations, parents  and HCPs 
initially  struggled  to  find  a  direction  for  data  gathering. 
However, regardless of their initial choices, the experience 
of  gathering  and  reviewing  data  inspired  a  collaborative 
data-relabeling  process  between  the  parent  and  HCP.  It 
made  them,  and  thus  also  the  design  research  team,  see 
possibilities  and  pitfalls  of  data  that  they  would  not 
necessarily have thought of before. For the same reason, we 
directly  implemented  new  design  ideas  arising  from  the 
insights  that emerged.  And  again,  it was  the  experience of 
participants  using  the  updated  data-enabled  design  canvas 
that  gave  the  most  valuable  insights  to  move  forward.  As 
the tools were designed to be open for remote updates, we 
have  been  able  to  run  multiple  insight-to-design  iterations 
in  a  single  set  of  continuous  situated  explorations.  The 
participants  (i.e.  families,  healthcare  professionals  and 
researchers),  study  location  and  setup  have  had  a  clear 
impact  on  how  these  situated  explorations  developed. 
Hence,  we  treat  the  presented  narratives  and  concepts  as 
well-grounded starting points for future research rather than 
fully evaluated outcomes. 

CONCLUSION 
From  related  previous  work,  we  saw  two  clear  ways  in 
which  others  have  approached  data-intensive  projects.  The 
first  uses  data  only  as  part  of  the  solution;  the  second 
departs from data and questions how it might be relevant in 
a  given  context.  The  latter,  however,  always  defined  what 
data  was  used  upfront.  In  this  paper,  we  present  a  third 
approach,  based  on  situated  and  explorative  data-enabled 
design approach. Many of our initial insights show a large 
overlap with those presented in previous work. However, as 
we  moved  forward  and  used  different  designs  to  embody 
these  insights,  they  became  more  detailed,  nuanced  and, 
simply, different; they build on more complex insights from 
combinations of data in different settings that continuously 
evolve. In the case study, we have shown how we brought 
together  parents,  HCPs  and  design  researchers  who  were 
enabled to actively contribute by means of the data-enabled 
canvas.  Through  this,  we  demonstrated  how  different 
stakeholders,  as  experts  in  their  own  areas,  together  with 
design researchers have used data as a creative  material to 
allow new design interventions to emerge iteratively, while 
situated in real life.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This research was supported by the IMPULSE perinatology 
framework. 

CHI 2018 Honourable MentionCHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 297Page 10REFERENCES 
1.  Margunn Aanestad. 2003. The Camera as an Actor Design-

13. Stefan Hirschauer. 1991. The Manufacture of Bodies in 
Surgery. Social Studies of Science 21, 2: 297-319. 

in-Use of Telemedicine Infrastructure in Surgery. 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) 12, 1: 1-
20. 

2.  Amid Ayobi, Paul Marshall, Anna L Cox and Yunan Chen. 
2017. Quantifying the Body and Caring for the Mind: Self-
Tracking in Multiple Sclerosis. In proceedings of the 2017 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
- CHI’17, 6889-6901.   

3.  Apple. 2017. A bold way to look at your health. Retrieved 

December 11, 2017 from 
https://www.apple.com/ios/health/ 

4.  Sander Bogers, Joep Frens, Janne van Kollenburg, Eva 

Deckers, and Caroline Hummels, 2016. Connected Baby 
Bottle: A design case study towards a framework for data-
enabled design. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM 
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS’16), 
301-311. 

5.  Chia-Fang Chung, Jonathan Cook, Elizabeth Bales, 
Jasmine Zia, and Sean A. Munson. 2015. More than 
telemonitoring: Health provider use and nonuse of life-log 
data in irritable bowel syndrome and weight management. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 17(8). doi: 
10.2196/jmir.4364. 

6.  Chia-Fang Chung, Kristin Dew, Allison Cole, Jasmine Zia, 
James Fogarty, Julie A. Kientz and Sean A. Munson. 2016. 
Boundary negotiating artifacts in personal informatics: 
Patient-provider collaboration with patient-generated data. 
In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer-
Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing. 

7.  Mary Jo Deering, Erin Siminerio, and Scott Weinstein. 
2013. Issue Brief: Patient-Generated Health Data and 
Health IT. Office of the National Coordinator for 
HealthInformation Technology 

8.  Biplap Deka. 2016. Data-driven Mobile App Design. In 

Proceedings of the User Interface Software and 
Technology Symposium –UIST '16 Adjunct, 21-24. 

9.  Daniel A. Epstein, An Ping, James Fogarty, and Sean A. 
Munson. 2015. A Lived Informatics Model of Personal 
Informatics. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International 
Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing 
(UbiComp '15).  

10. Espressif Systems IOT Team. 2017. ESP8266EX 

Datasheet. Retrieved September 18, 2017 from https://cdn-
shop.adafruit.com/product-files/2471/0A-
ESP8266__Datasheet__EN_v4.3.pdf.  

11. Fitbit. Find your fit. 2017. Retrieved December 11, 2017 

from www.fitbit.com/.  

12. Glow Inc. 2017.Glow Baby - Baby Tracker App. Retrieved 

September 18, 2017 from 
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/id1077177456.  

14. Nicholas Huba, and Yan Zhang. 2012. Designing patient-
centered personal health records (PHRs): health care 
professionals’ perspective on patient generated data. 
Journal of Medical Systems 36, 6: 3893-3905. 

15. Kelly Joyce. 2005. Appealing Images: Magnetic 

Resonance Imagining and the Production of Authoritative 
Knowledge. Social Studies of Science 35, 3: 437-462. 

16. Marije Kanis, Saskia Robben, Judith Hagen, Anne 

Bimmerman, Natasja Wagelaar and Ben Kröse. 2013. 
Sensor Monitoring in the Home: Giving Voice to Elderly 
People. In proceedings of conference on Pervasive 
Computing Technologies for Healthcare. 97-100. 

17. Bonnie Kaplan. 1995. Objectification and negotiation in 
interpreting clinical images: implications for computer-
based patient records. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine 7, 
5: 439-454. 

18. Julie Kientz, Rosa Arriaga, Gregory Abowd. 2009. Baby 

Steps: Evaluation of a System to Support Record-Keeping 
for Parents of Young Children. In Proceedings of the 2009 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
- CHI’09, 1713-1722. 

19. Soo-Cheol Kim, Young-Sik Jeong, Sang-Oh Park. 2013. 

RFID-based indoor location tracking to ensure the safety of 
the elderly in smart home environments. Pers Ubiquit 
Comput 17:1699–1707. 

20. Yoojung Kim, Eunyoung Heo, Hyunjeong Lee, Sookyoung 

Ji, Jueun Choi, Jeong-Whun Kim, Joongseek Lee, 
Sooyoung Yoo. Prescribing 10,000 Steps like Aspirin: 
Designing a Novel Interface for Data-Driven Medical 
Consultation. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI’17, 5797-
5796. 

21. Predrag Klasnja and Wanda Pratt. 2012. Healthcare in the 
pocket: Mapping the Space of Mobile-phone Health 
Interventions. J Biomet Inform 45, 1: 184-198. 

22. Janne van Kollenburg, Sander Bogers, Eva Deckers, Joep 
Frens, Caroline Hummels. 2017. How Design-inclusive 
UXR Influenced the Integration of Project Activities: 
Three Design Cases from Industry. In Proceedings of the 
2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems - CHI’17, 1408-1418.  

23. Eun Kyoung Choe, Nicole Lee, Bongshin Lee, Wanda 
Pratt and Julie Kientz. 2014. Understanding Quantified-
selfers’ Practices in Collecting and Exploring Personal 
Data. In Proceedings of the 2014 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI’14, 1143-
1152. 

24. Ian Li, Anind K. Dey and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A stagebased 
model of personal informatics systems. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '10). ACM 

CHI 2018 Honourable MentionCHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 297Page 1125. Ian Li, Anind K. Dey and Jodi Forlizzi. 2011. 

Understanding my data, myself: supporting self-reflection 
with ubicomp technologies. In Proceedings of the 
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing - UbiComp’11, 405-
414. 

34. Philips AVENT. 2017. uGrow- the world’s first medical 
baby app with connected devices giving you personal 
advice that matters. Retrieved September 18, 2017 from 
http://www.philips.co.uk/c-m-mo/ugrow-healthy-baby-
development-app.  

26. Life'n Stats LLC. 2017. MammaBaby - Breast feeding App 
& Baby Log Tracker. Retrieved September 18, 2017 from 
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/mammababy-breast-
feeding-app-baby-log-tracker/id618601202?mt=8.  

35. Amit Prasad. 2005. Making Images/Making Bodies: 

Visibilizing and Disciplining through Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging (MRI). Science, Technology & Human Values 30, 
2: 291-316. 

27. Máxima Medisch Centrum. 2017. De METC van het 

Máxima Medisch Centrum. Retrieved September 18, 2017 
from 
https://www.mmc.nl/professionals/wetenschappelijk_onder
zoek_in_mmc/metc/introductie.  

28. Helena Mentis, Anita Komlodi, Katrina Schrader, Michael 
Phipps, Ann Gruber-Baldini, Karen Yarbrough and Lisa 
Shulman. 2017. Crafting a View of Self-Tracking Data in 
the Clinical Visit. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - 
CHI’17, 5800-5812. 

29. Gina Neff and Dawn Nafus. 2016. Self-Tracking. MIT 

Press, Cambridge, MA. 

30. Nighp Software LLC. 2017. Baby Tracker (Feed timer, 
sleep, diaper log). Retrieved September 18, 2017 from 
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/baby-tracker-feed-timer-
sleep-diaper-log/id779656557?mt=8. 

31. Nokia. 2017. An ideal weight loss companion. Retrieved 

December 11, 2017 from 
https://health.nokia.com/us/en/body-plus. 

32. Sun Young Park, Hee Young Jeong, John Zimmerman. 
2008. ENSURE: Support for Parents in Managing their 
Children’s Health. In \Proceedings of the Conference on 
Design and Emotion. The Design and Emotion Society. 

33. Philips AVENT. 2017. Philips AVENT. Retrieved January 
22, 2017 from http://www.philips.co.uk/c-m-mo/philips-
avent-and-your-baby.  

36. D.A. Schön. 1983. The Reflective Practitioner: How 

Professionals Think in Action. New York: Basic Books. 

37. Jelle Stienstra, Sander Bogers, Joep Frens. 2015. 

Designerly Handles: Dynamic and Contextualized Enablers 
for Interaction Designers. In Proceedings of Conference on 
Design and Semantics of Form and Movement 2015. 86-94. 

38. Hyewon Suh, John Porter, Alexis Hiniker, Julie Kientz. 

2014. @BabySteps: Design and Evaluation of a System for 
using Twitter for Tracking Children’s Developmental 
Milestones. In Proceedings of the 2014 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI’14, 2279-
2288. 

39. Emanuel Vonach, Marianne Ternek, Georg Gerstweiler, 
Hannes Kaufmann. 2016. Design of a Health Monitoring 
Toy for Children. In Proceedings of the 2016 Interaction 
Design and Children Conference - IDC’16, 58-67. 

40. Naomi Yamashita, Hideaki Kuzuoka, Keiji Hirata, Takashi 
Kudo, Eiji Aramaki and Kazuki Hattori. 2017. Changing 
Moods: How Manual Tracking by Family Caregivers 
Improves Caring and Family Communication. In 
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems - CHI’17, 158-169. 

41. Haining Zhu, Joanna Colgan, Madhu Reddy, and Eun 
Kyoung Choe. 2016. Sharing Patient-Generated Data in 
Clinical Practices: An Interview Study. In AMIA Annual 
Symposium Proceedings American Medical Informatics 
Association, 1303–1312. 

CHI 2018 Honourable MentionCHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 297Page 12 
