Fine-Grained Sharing of Sensed Physical Activity:  
A Value Sensitive Approach 
Daniel A. Epstein, Alan Borning, James Fogarty 
Computer Science & Engineering 
DUB Group, University of Washington 
{depstein, borning, jfogarty}@cs.washington.edu 

ABSTRACT 
Personal informatics applications in a variety of domains are 
increasingly enabled by low-cost personal sensing. Although 
applications capture fine-grained activity for self-reflection, 
sharing is generally limited to high-level summaries. There 
are  potential  advantages  to  fine-grained  sharing,  but  also 
potential  harms.  To  help  investigate  this  complex  design 
space,  we  employ  Value  Sensitive  Design  to  consider 
whether  and  how  to  share  fine-grained  step  activity.  We 
identify  key  values  and  value  tensions,  and  we  develop 
scenarios  to  highlight  these.  We  then  design  a  set  of  data 
transformations  that  seek  to  maximize  the  benefits  while 
minimizing  the  harms  of  detailed  sharing.  These  include  a 
novel  approach  to  interactive  modification  of  fine-grained 
step data, allowing people to remove private data and using 
motif  discovery  to  generate  realistic  replacement  data. 
Finally,  we  conduct  semi-structured  interviews  with  12 
participants examining these scenarios and transformations. 
We distill results into a set of design considerations for fine-
grained physical activity sharing. 

Author Keywords 
Personal  Informatics,  Value  Sensitive  Design,  physical 
activity sensing, social sharing. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI). 

INTRODUCTION 
The rise of personal informatics has been enabled in part by 
the  increasing  ubiquity  of  personal  sensing  [25].  Sensing 
takes  many  forms,  from  simple  pedometers  [6,10,19]  to 
location  and  other  information  sensed  by  mobile  phones 
[2,13,18]  to  sophisticated  disaggregation  of  home  utility 
usage  [14,15]. Prior  work  examines  how  such  sensing  can 
support  a  variety  of  goals,  including  increasing  physical 
activity [30,37], adopting more environmentally sustainable 
behaviors [13,28], and improving sleep quality [5,20]. 

Permission to  make digital or  hard copies of all or part of  this work  for personal  or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM 
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, 
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a 
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
UbiComp’13, September 8–12, 2013, Zurich, Switzerland. 
Copyright © 2013 ACM 978-1-4503-1770-2/13/09…$15.00. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2493432.2493433 

Figure 1. A fine-grained view of daily step activity.  
Five-minute intervals are colored by activity level. 

Many  applications  highlight  social  sharing  in  personal 
informatics and behavior change. Sharing sensed data  with 
family and friends can be effective for gaining social support 
[22,25,28].  Prior  work  emphasizes  goal  sharing  around 
high-level  summaries,  such  as  walking  70,000  steps  per 
week  or  remembering 
lights  [6,28,30]. 
Commercial  applications  also  share  high-level  summaries, 
such as daily step totals in FitBit [10] and Jawbone UP [19] 
or weight-loss progress in MyFitnessPal [31]. 

turn  off 

to 

We  are  interested  in  the  additional  opportunities  and 
concerns presented by sharing fine-grained personal activity 
data.  For  example,  Figure 1  presents  a  detailed  view  of  a 
day’s  step  activity  displayed  in  five-minute  intervals  [10]. 
Detailed sharing can enable new forms of social interaction 
around  sensed  activity  data.  Instead  of  only  seeing  that  a 
person did not reach a weekly step goal, family and friends 
could  praise  morning  walks  visible  in  the  detailed  data. 
Family and friends might also use detailed data to discover 
effective strategies, such as adding a morning walk to their 
own  routine  or  noticing  a  person  is  generally  idle  during 
lunch and suggesting they walk together. 

Although detailed sharing presents new opportunities, it also 
presents  complex  design  considerations.  One  concern  is 
over-sharing.  For  example,  Munson  and  Consolvo  found 
people worried about sharing a trivial accomplishment and 
thus  opted  not  to  share  at  all  [30].  Other  concerns  arise 
around privacy. A person who chooses to share fine-grained 
data expects to give visibility into associated activities, but 
may object to how that data might be used to infer apparently 
unrelated information. Current approaches generally provide 
only a simple binary choice of “share” or “do not share”, thus 
limiting  how  people  can 
these 
opportunities while managing concerns. 

take  advantage  of 

To help address the complex value considerations that arise 
in  fine-grained  sharing,  we  turn  to  Value  Sensitive  Design 

Session: Location-Based Services IIUbiComp’13, September 8–12, 2013, Zurich, Switzerland489 
 
 
 
investigations:  conceptual 

(VSD), an established method for addressing human values 
and value tensions in a design process [11]. VSD uses three 
investigations  of 
types  of 
stakeholders,  values,  benefits,  and  harms; 
technical 
investigations  of  features  and  infrastructure;  and  empirical 
investigations involving stakeholders and potential contexts 
of a design. These are applied iteratively and integratively. 

The focus of our technical investigations is on methods for 
transforming fine-grained activity data prior to sharing. We 
consider  designs  based  on  unmodified  data,  a  high-level 
summary,  and  deleting  data  prior  to  sharing.  Finally,  we 
develop  a  new  approach  to  interactively  transforming  data 
that attempts to explicitly preserve benefits of sharing while 
giving people greater control over what they share. We also 
focus our current exploration on fine-grained step activity as 
captured  by  the  FitBit  pedometer  [10].  Step  activity  is 
important to fitness applications and is appropriate for these 
initial explorations. Our discussion considers how our work 
might be extended to other types of activity data. 

The specific contributions of this work include: 

  Identification  of  a  range  of  values  and  value  tensions 
arising in sharing of fine-grained physical activity data. 

  Exploration  of  a  set  of  transformations  of  fine-grained 
activity  data,  including  how  designs  might  preserve  the 
benefits of sharing while minimizing potential harms. 

  Development  of  a  new  approach 

interactively 
transforming fine-grained physical activity data, allowing 
people to remove private data and using motif discovery 
to generate replacement data, implemented for step data. 

to 

  Results of value-oriented semi-structured interviews with 
people  who  use  pedometers,  based  on  scenarios  that 
highlight potential benefits and harms of social sharing. 

  Design considerations for future applications that include 

social sharing of fine-grained physical activity data. 

RELATED WORK 
Prior 
computing, including some work from a VSD perspective. 

research  has  examined  sharing 

in  ubiquitous 

Value Sensitive Design 
VSD is an established approach to addressing human values 
throughout  a  design  process  [11].  An  early  application  of 
VSD  in  Ubiquitous  Computing  investigated  a  privacy 
addendum for open-source licenses [12]. Camp and Connelly 
discuss many aspects of privacy in Ubiquitous Computing, 
including  opportunities  for  Value  Sensitive  Design  as  an 
approach  to  understanding  privacy  and  data  sharing  in 
Ubiquitous  Computing  [4].  Our  focus  on  social  sharing 
means  the  revelation  of  information  is  inherent  and 
intentional. But there are still important value questions and 
value tensions around potential designs. 

Czeskis  et  al.  used  VSD  to  investigate  personal  safety 
applications for use by teens and their parents [9]. Although 
sharing in the parent / child relationship differs from social 
sharing  among  peers,  that  work  explored  a  number  of  key 

issues  that  also  arise  in  this  work,  such  as  unwittingly 
revealing personal information about indirect stakeholders. 

Sharing Applications 

support, 

including 

studies  of 

Sharing For Social Support 
Online communities have been studied for how they promote 
communities 
social 
emphasizing weight loss and cancer care [17,34]. Tang et al. 
differentiate  social  sharing  from  purpose  sharing  in  the 
context of location sharing [36]. In our work, we are mostly 
considering  social  sharing  of  physical  activity,  but  can 
imagine purpose-driven scenarios. For example, sharing with 
a personal trainer or doctor would be purpose-oriented. 

Some  prior  research  employs  deception  to  address  privacy 
concerns.  Iachello  et  al.  implement  a  location-requesting 
application  in  which  a  person  can  provide  incorrect  or 
time-shifted  responses  [18].  They  found  a  low  amount  of 
deception in their field study, and suggested  this may have 
been  in  part  due  to  an  expectation  of  trust.  Page  et  al. 
interviewed  people  who  use  location-sharing  services, 
finding they mislead friends about their location and worry 
the  services  could  expose  the  discrepancy  [33].  However, 
many participants believed deception would go undetected. 

Sharing In Activity Applications 
Consolvo  et  al.  consider  the  design  of  technology  to 
encourage physical activity [6]. Their Houston system shared 
participant  daily  step  activity  with  friends.  Participants 
reported  receiving  social  support  and  pressure  through  the 
system,  and  also  reported 
in  sharing  more 
information  than  total  step  count.  Klasnja  et  al.  examine 
privacy concerns in personal sensing applications [21]. They 
report participants react differently to the potential recording 
and  sharing  of  different  types  of  sensor  data:  they  felt 
comfortable  disclosing  accelerometer  data,  but  were 
concerned about revealing location or raw audio. 

interest 

Fish’n’Steps varied the size of fish in a bowl as a metaphor 
for  physical  activity,  as  sensed  using  pedometers  [27]. 
Fish’n’Steps  included  cooperative  and  competitive  sharing 
of physical activity: participants shared a fishbowl with other 
participants, and the fishbowl of the most active group was 
displayed on a public screen. The system allowed people to 
send  words  of  encouragement  to  other  people  in  the  same 
bowl, but participants rarely used this feature as they seemed 
unwilling to interact with people they did not know outside 
the  context  of  the  study.  Toscos  et  al.  sought  to  increase 
physical activity among adolescent girls using a step count 
sharing  application  that  allowed  the  teenagers  to  send 
motivating text messages to one another  [37]. When social 
support dropped off, activity levels were lower. 

Location Sharing 
Location  sharing  has  been  extensively  explored  in  prior 
work. In early  work, Barkhuus and Dey found a desire for 
location-based services [2]. Consolvo et al. built a location 
service  that  allows  selecting  a  granularity  of  sharing  [7]. 
Participants generally felt comfortable disclosing their most 
detailed  location  (address  or  place  name),  except  when  it 

Session: Location-Based Services IIUbiComp’13, September 8–12, 2013, Zurich, Switzerland490would not be beneficial to the recipient (as when a recipient 
is not knowledgeable of the area where a sharer is located). 

supporting  closeness  for  couples  [1]  or  peace  of  mind  in 
formal and informal caregiver relationships [32].  

Systems  have  also  explored  always-on  location  sharing. 
These often take a policy-based approach,  allowing people 
to define when and with whom to share their location [8,23]. 
People generally have complex privacy settings and are not 
their 
very  good  at  defining  rules  or  understanding 
consequences. Cornwell et al. found the rules people define 
accurately classify 59% of location disclosures, which can be 
improved by having people modify their rules or by applying 
machine learning techniques [8]. 

Krumm  proposes  obfuscation  as  a  method  of  injecting 
privacy into location-sharing applications [24]. He suggests 
degrading data prior to sharing, such as by adding noise to 
obscure  a  person’s  exact  location.  Another  approach  is 
K-anonymity,  which 
selectively  does  not  disclose 
information  that  could  be  used  to  narrow  the  identity  of  a 
person to a set smaller than  K [35]. K-anonymity does not 
support  sharing  for  social  purposes,  as  the  identity  of  the 
sharer is already known and privacy concerns instead focus 
on what sharing reveals about a person’s activities. 

Varying Sharing Granularity 
Munson and Consolvo developed GoalPost, which included 
sharing a vague physical activity view that linked to a more 
detailed view [30]. Participants in their study generally found 
this additional privacy protection unnecessary. Consolvo et 
al.’s  study  of  location  sharing  at  multiple  levels  of 
granularity found identity of the recipient to be the biggest 
factor in deciding what to share [7]. Tang et al. found people 
sometimes share location information that requires ‘insider 
knowledge’ to fully decode (e.g. ‘at the Giant Eagle’) [36]. 
They also believe that people resist providing a very general 
location  (e.g.  ‘Pennsylvania’)  because  they  feared  coming 
off as intentionally vague. 

CONCEPTUAL INVESTIGATIONS 
Per our VSD approach, we examine sharing of fine-grained 
personal activity data through a lens of stakeholders, benefits 
and harms, values, and value tensions.  

VSD  emphasizes  considering  perspectives  of  both  people 
who directly interact with technology and others who might 
be impacted by it [11]. In our domain, direct stakeholders are 
both the  sharers (i.e., the people sharing activity data) and 
recipients  (i.e.,  those  who  view  activity  data).  Indirect 
stakeholders include anybody whose activity correlates with 
a  sharer  (e.g.,  people  who  live  or  walk  together).  Because 
their  activity  correlates,  a  sharer  gives  recipients  indirect 
insight into activities of these additional stakeholders. 

Fine-grained  sharing  offers  many  potential  benefits.  As 
motivated in our introduction, family and friends might give 
concrete  praise  for  activities  visible  in  shared  data,  might 
discover  or  share  exercise  strategies,  or  might  identify 
together.  These  and  other 
opportunities 
interactions  around  fine-grained  data  can  help  people 
achieve  fitness  goals  [7].  Other  opportunities  include 

to  exercise 

There are also potential harms to sharing fine-grained data. 
Sharers might be concerned about a loss of privacy, as data 
may  reveal  activity  they  are  not  comfortable  sharing. 
Transformations  can  help  mitigate  privacy  concerns,  but 
introduce their own potential harms, including undermining 
the  trust  of  recipients.  For  example,  Page  et al.  found 
recipients  of  location-sharing  updates  reported  ignoring 
sharers  who  regularly  lied  about  their  locations  [33]. 
Transforming  data  prior  to  sharing  can  also  impact  the 
quality of interaction sharers might have around that data, as 
sharers  may  not  know  whether they can trust advice  given 
based on incomplete or modified activity data. 

Key Values and Value Tensions 
In  our  conceptual  investigations,  we  identified  two  values 
motivating  fine-grained  sharing:  support  from  family  and 
friends who can use shared data to help sharers accomplish 
their goals, and support for sharer accountability to others for 
achieving their goals. Additionally, recipients expect honesty 
from  the  sharer,  and  in  turn  develop  trust  in  the  sharer. 
Finally,  sharers  want  to  preserve  certain  forms  of  privacy. 
Friedman  et  al.  [11]  present  working  definitions  of  these 
values, which have also appeared in value-oriented work in 
related domains [4,9]. 

In designing sharing applications, there is a tension between 
privacy  and  the  other  values.  Sharers  must  find  a  balance 
between how data sharing impacts their  privacy while also 
enabling support and accountability. Some transformations 
may preserve privacy at the expense of honesty, potentially 
undermining  recipient  trust.  The  remainder  of  this  work 
motivates and discusses designs in terms of these values. 

SCENARIO DEVELOPMENT 
We took the findings from the conceptual investigation and 
developed  four  concrete  scenarios.  These  scenarios  were 
to  highlight  different  stakeholders,  potential 
designed 
benefits  and  harms,  and  value  tensions  that  we  anticipate 
when sharing fine-grained personal activity data in the real 
world.  We  later  use  these  scenarios  in  our  empirical 
investigation as part of our semi-structured interviews. 

Scenario 1: Goal Achievement 
Ellen works a desk job, becomes curious about her activity 
level, and purchases a pedometer. She sets a daily step goal, 
but  has  trouble  reaching  it  because  her  job  keeps  her 
sedentary  most  of  the  day.  One  day,  she  decides  to  walk 
around her office multiple times throughout the day, and she 
achieves her goal. She is very excited by this and wants to 
share her accomplishment with her friends, many of whom 
also have desk jobs and want to become more active. 

Discussion: The benefit of fine-grained sharing is clear for 
Ellen.  She  is  proud  of  achieving  her  goal  by  including 
activity  in  her  work  day,  and  she  wants  to  share  how  she 
accomplished  her  goal.  Ellen’s  friends  are  similarly 
motivated and would likely appreciate her accomplishment. 
Ellen’s primary value consideration is support. 

Session: Location-Based Services IIUbiComp’13, September 8–12, 2013, Zurich, Switzerland491Scenario 2: Leaving Work Early 
One  weekday,  Hunter  decides  to  go  for  an  afternoon  run 
around a nearby lake. He goes to work early, completes his 
responsibilities,  and  leaves  to  run  in  the  afternoon.  Hunter 
finishes  his  run  in  record  time  and  wants  to  share  on  a 
running website. He is conflicted, however, because some of 
his  friends  on  the  site  are  co-workers  who  work  standard 
hours.  He  is  concerned  that  highlighting  his  afternoon 
absence will reflect poorly on his work performance. 

Discussion: Hunter wishes to share detailed activity to gain 
social  support  and  challenge  his  friends.  However,  he  is 
concerned for privacy because sharing will highlight he was 
not at work that afternoon. Flexible hours may be acceptable 
and Hunter may not have reason to be concerned, but he still 
may not want the event recorded. Even if not currently cause 
for  concern,  the  run  may  be  found  and  interpreted  out  of 
context  when  Hunter  is  being  reviewed  for  a  future 
promotion by a different manager. 

Scenario 3: Late Night Activity 
Whitney regularly wears a pedometer to track her physical 
activity.  She  has  configured  her  privacy  settings  so  her 
fine-grained  data  is  visible  to  close  friends,  including  her 
boyfriend Chris. One day, she tells Chris she will be studying 
in the evening. She later receives a text from a friend she has 
not  seen  recently,  suggesting  they  meet  at  a  local  bar. 
Whitney meets the friend and returns home at 3:00am. A few 
days later, Chris is comparing his activity levels to Whitney’s 
to find ideas for how they can be more active. He notices late 
night  activity  and  wonders  if  Whitney  is  intentionally  not 
disclosing something to him. 

Discussion:  This  scenario  motivates  transformations,  as 
Whitney did not intend to share her late night activity but did 
not  have  an  option  to  transform  it.  Whitney  must  now 
manage a discrepancy between her activity data and what she 
told  Chris.  This  is  a  tension  between  privacy  and  trust. 
Depending  on  their  relationship,  it  may  not  be  an  issue. 
Neither  was  malicious:  Whitney  did  not  intend  to deceive, 
and  Chris  was  not  intentionally  snooping.  This  scenario  is 
therefore  fairly  tame,  but  more  worrisome  variants  could 
include accusations of infidelity or even stalking. 

Scenario 4: Finding a Running Buddy 
Gloria recently began running a route near her home. She is 
now bored with the route and decides to post it to a running 
website for suggestions. She is messaged by a member of the 
website who lives nearby. The two run together once, have a 
good experience, and it becomes a regular event. 

Discussion: Gloria was motivated to share her detailed route 
because she  wanted  support. Although Gloria’s experience 
was positive, there were potential harms. Specifically, Gloria 
undermined  her  own  privacy  (and  in  the  worst  case, 
potentially her safety) by disclosing where she lives (i.e., the 
start and end of her running route).  

TECHNICAL INVESTIGATIONS 
We began this research with an investigation of an interface 
for interactively transforming fine-grained activity data, but 

later realized there were important value considerations and 
the  design  space  was  more  complex  than  we  first  thought. 
We  then  adopted  a  VSD  approach  and  conducted  our 
conceptual investigation, including developing scenarios to 
highlight value tensions. Based on our identified values and 
value tensions, we returned to our technical investigation and 
considered five transformations. These transformations were 
created  to  surface  an  array  of  value  tensions,  with  each 
transformation  supporting  certain  values  while  raising 
concerns  about  others.  We  now  present  these,  discussing 
each in terms of both our FitBit pedometer data and how an 
analogous transformation might be applied to different types 
of data. Our final transformation requires significant novel 
implementation, which we also present. 

Detailed Single-Day View 
This view makes fine-grained data captured for 
self-reflection  directly  available  for  sharing  (i.e.,  directly 
shares the detailed data presented in Figure 1). A person can 
decide whether to share a day’s activity, but cannot modify 
the data. This is analogous to existing applications that limit 
sharers to “share” or “do not share” (e.g., running or biking 
applications that allow a person to share a detailed map of 
their just-completed route). 

Value  Tensions:  This  design’s  transparency  emphasizes 
support, accountability, and honesty. It also raises concerns 
for  privacy,  as  choosing  to  share  reveals  all  of  a  day’s 
activity.  The  design  can  also  raise  concerns  for  trust.  If  a 
recipient becomes accustomed to daily activity shares, but a 
sharer chooses not to share a particular day, the recipient may 
wonder what activity prevented sharing.  

Longitudinal View 
This  view  aggregates  step  data 
into  daily  step  counts,  shared 
automatically  at  the  end  of 
every day. These step counts appear in a chart with step totals 
for the prior week. This is analogous to existing applications 
that  automatically  share  high-level  summaries.  Here  the 
summarization is simply a summation of step count data, but 
will vary in other applications (e.g., using the total length of 
a run, thus removing location details). 

Value  Tensions:  Of  the  five  views  we  consider  here,  this 
gives the least insight into sharer activities. It thus maximizes 
privacy  at 
the  expense  of  minimizing  support  and 
accountability.  Concerns  around  honesty  or  trust  are  also 
minimized by the completely automated approach. 

Limited Hours View 
This  view  presents  the  same 
detailed  information  as  the 
single-day view, but limits sharing to a range of “daytime” 
hours specified by a sharer. Activity outside this range is not 
shared,  under  an  assumption  it  may  be  more  private  (e.g., 
sleep  patterns,  staying  out  late  with  friends,  or  other 
nighttime activity spikes a person may not want disclosed). 
As  with  the  detailed  view,  a  sharer  can  decide  whether  to 
share this limited view of a day’s activity. Total activity, as 

Session: Location-Based Services IIUbiComp’13, September 8–12, 2013, Zurich, Switzerland492reported elsewhere in the application, also reflects only steps 
from shared “daytime” hours. This was motivated by prior 
work  on  location  sharing,  in  which  participants  refuse 
sharing  before  8:00am  or  after  6:00pm  to  avoid  revealing 
non-work locations  [8].  Analogous approaches  might also 
be  based  on  different  types  of  contextual  filters  (e.g.,  only 
sharing data sensed within sharer-approved locations). 

modify  interval  step  count  (e.g.,  increasing  or  decreasing 
activity  in  a  highlighted  interval).  In  response,  the  system 
automatically  generates  an  offset  elsewhere  in  the  day 
(i.e., decreasing  or  increasing  activity  to  maintain  the  total 
step count for the day). As we detail in the next section, our 
implementation  analyzes  a  person’s  activity  history  to 
automatically generate realistic offset transformations. 

Value  Tensions:  This  view  offers  greater  privacy  than  the 
detailed  view,  as  it  automatically  hides  a  part  of  the  day 
likely  to  be  more  sensitive  and  still  gives  control  over 
whether  to  share.  It  might  also  improve  support  and 
accountability  if  automatic  removal  of  evening  activity 
encourages greater sharing of daily activity. There are minor 
concerns  for  honesty  and  accountability,  because  total 
activity  level  is  not  accurate  if  people  have  any  activity 
outside their approved “daytime” hours. Concerns for trust 
are similar to the detailed view, as a recipient may wonder 
why a person limited sharing to certain hours or chose not to 
share activity for a particular day. 

Relatively minor modifications can significantly change the 
value  tradeoffs.  Displaying  total  activity  for  the  complete 
day instead of only “daytime” hours would improve honesty 
and  accountability,  but  would  come  at  the  expense  of 
privacy, as the discrepancy could reveal the presence of large 
activity spikes outside “daytime” hours. 

Interactive Deletion 
This  view  allows  a  sharer 
to  interactively  highlight 
and delete data prior to sharing. As an example motivation 
from our scenarios, Whitney might delete the  activity from 
her night out with a friend and then be comfortable sharing 
the remainder of her activity. Zero values are common in step 
data, so deletion is not obviously recognizable. Deletion may 
require greater care for other types of activity data, perhaps 
drawing  upon  the  methods  we  develop  for  our  interactive 
transformation interface discussed next. 

Value Tensions: The primary tension is between privacy and 
honesty, trust, and accountability. Deletion allows sharers to 
preserve  privacy  by  removing  activity  they  do  not  want  to 
share,  but  accountability  is  impacted  because  total  activity 
level  is  incorrect.  A  more  challenging  scenario  arises  if  a 
recipient loses  trust after observing inconsistency resulting 
from a deletion. For example, Whitney might excitedly post 
her high step count for the day, but later share a detailed view 
that contains fewer steps after deleting her walk home from 
the bar in the early morning. 

novel 

approach 

Interactive Transformation 
Our final interface explores 
a 
to 
fine-grained  activity  sharing:  we  support 
interactive 
modification  of  fine-grained  data  to  mitigate  privacy 
concerns  while  working  to  ensure  resulting  data  preserves 
the  original  benefits  of  sharing.  For  step  activity  data,  we 
define this as preserving the daily step count and the typical 
activity  patterns.  A  sharer  can  interactively  highlight  and 

Although we focus on step activity, the idea of interactively 
modifying fine-grained data while preserving the benefits of 
sharing  can  be  more  broadly  applied.  From  a  technical 
perspective, the goal is to modify data while preserving key 
invariants.  For  example,  when  Gloria  seeks  feedback  on  a 
running route, she might adjust the beginning and end of a 
sensed  route  to  be  in  a  park  through  which  she  runs  (i.e., 
changing the order of points, but not the shape of the route).  

Value  Tensions:  As  with  deletion,  transformation  supports 
privacy by allowing a sharer to remove  sensitive data. The 
tensions are again with honesty, trust, and accountability, but 
the  design  attempts  to  mitigate  these  concerns.  Preserving 
the  original  reason  for  sharing  by  maintaining  the  day’s 
overall step count helps support accountability and preserve 
trust. A focus on generating realistic transformations is also 
intended  to  preserve  trust,  but  ultimate  responsibility 
remains with the sharer. A sharer who moves a midday run 
to  the  middle  of  the  night  may  succeed  in  conveying  their 
overall level of activity, but will probably introduce concerns 
for honesty and trust. 

ENABLING INTERACTIVE TRANSFORMATION 
Interactive transformation is based upon a visualization of 5-
minute activity intervals, as in Figure 1. Transformations are 
therefore defined in terms of a histogram, where the index in 
the histogram corresponds to time-of-day and the value at a 
bucket  to  a  step  count  for  that  interval.  A  region  is  a 
contiguous  set  of  histogram  buckets.  A  sharer  can  add 
activity  to  a  highlighted  region,  remove  activity  from  a 
highlighted  region,  or  shift  an  activity  region  in  time.  We 
implement these actions using three lower-level operators: 

Set: Given a list of step values and a region of the same size, 
overwrite the region with the provided step values. 

Modify:  Given a target  step  count and a region, overwrite 
the  region  with  realistic  data  containing  a  total  number  of 
steps approximately equal to the target. 

Offset:  Given  a  full  day  of  activity  data,  overwrite  one  or 
more unmodified regions with realistic data that restores the 
total step count to its original value. 

These  operators  are  sufficient  for  our  higher-level  actions 
and  could  support  additional  interface  functionality.  We 
currently implement add as a relative action:  

(1) compute current step count in the selected region,  
(2) compute a target by applying a fixed difference,  
(3) modify the region to the target value, and  
(4) offset to restore the original total step count.  

Session: Location-Based Services IIUbiComp’13, September 8–12, 2013, Zurich, Switzerland493We implement remove similarly, but using a fixed target of 
zero. We implement shift using three operations:  

(1) set the source region into the destination region,  
(2) modify the source region to zero, and  
(3) offset to restore the original total step count. 

We chose these actions and operators to give control without 
requiring  that  sharers  manage  details of realistic  histogram 
manipulation.  Realistic  transformations  therefore  depend 
upon the modify and offset operations. In our examinations 
of collected FitBit data, these operations are difficult because 
activity  patterns  are  highly  variable  and  simple  techniques 
like  uniform  scaling  often  appear  unrealistic.  Instead  of 
attempting to model step activity, we take inspiration from 
methods developed for image completion [16]. We consider 
the region to be modified as a gap in activity data, search the 
sharer’s activity history for data that might be a good fit, and 
fill  the  gap  with  historical  data.  The  next  two  subsections 
detail our implementation. 

Modify Implementation 
Figure 2  illustrates  the  workflow  of  our  modify  operation. 
The sharer first specifies a region and a target activity level 
(in this case, a region of size 4 with a target of 1700 steps). 

The system obtains a portion of a person’s activity  history 
within  which  to  search. We currently  use the  past  week of 
activity.  This was selected to be large enough to provide data 
variety  and  capture  day-related  patterns  (e.g.,  running 
Wednesday morning), while small enough to promote recent 
data, remain responsive to changes, and to ensure interactive 
performance.  Step  activity  is  next  discretized,  a  standard 
pre-processing  step  for  motif  discovery  algorithms  we 
employ later in this workflow [26]. We designate a symbol 
for zero activity (the  most  common value), then  uniformly 
distribute non-zero activity over eight symbols. 

We next identify regions from historical data that would be 
realistic if inserted in the target gap. Based on the intuition 
that inserted activity should be consistent with its context, we 
filter  by  the  data  before  and  after  the  gap.  Figure 2C 
illustrates  this,  filtering  samples  that  do  not  match  the  gap 
context. For a gap of size k, we filter based on the k / 2 entries 
before  and  after  (referred  to as  the  gap  context). We use  a 
sliding  window  to  consider  all  regions  of  size  k,  compute 
Levenshtein  distance  between  our  gap  context  and  the 
context of each region, filtering regions above a threshold. 
The threshold is initially zero (i.e., an exact match), and is 
iteratively  relaxed  if  later  steps  are  unable  to  find  a  good 
region for the insertion. 

Among  regions  that  match  the  gap  context,  we  want  an 
example representing typical activity (i.e., that will not be out 
of  place  when  inserted).  We  implement  this  using  motif 
discovery.  Motifs  are  frequently  occurring  patterns  in 
time-series  data  [26],  previously  been  used  to  detect 
characteristic  activities  in  fine-grained  sensor  data  [3,29]. 
We apply the 1-motif brute force algorithm described by Lin 
et al. [26], generalized to find the ten largest motifs among 
our matching regions of size k. We define our radius using 

Figure 2. The workflow of the Modify operation. 
Levenshtein distance, requiring two regions assigned to the 
same motif have a distance less than k / 4. 

Each  motif  contains  regions  that  are  similar  and  found  at 
many different locations in an activity history. Regions not 
assigned to any motif do not occur frequently enough to be 
good candidates for our gap (i.e., they may seem unusual or 
out of place). We select a motif containing regions with an 
average step count within 10% of our target. If no such motif 
exists, we relax the filter threshold to generate new motifs. 
We  then  select  a  random  region  from  those  within  the 
selected motif, and set its values to our gap. 

Offset Implementation 
Figure  3  illustrates  the  workflow  of  offset.  The  prior 
operation implies a number of steps that need to be offset (in 
this  case,  1800  steps  were  added  in  a  region  of  size  4  and 
now need to be offset). We use a sliding window to consider 
all regions where we might add or remove the offset, using 
the  same  k  from  the  prior  operation  and  excluding  regions 
modified by the operation being offset. 

As  with  modify,  we  want  a  transformation  consistent  with 
historical activity. Specifically, we want an offset consistent 
with  daily  activity  trends.  If  a  sharer  walks  home  daily  at 
5:00pm, it would be unwise to remove this consistent daily 
activity. We score each region by the difference between step 

Session: Location-Based Services IIUbiComp’13, September 8–12, 2013, Zurich, Switzerland494 
Study Design 
Our  study  employed  in-person  semi-structured  interviews. 
We  first  asked  participants  about  their  pedometer  usage, 
including  their  motivation  for  using  a  pedometer,  average 
activity level, and their self-reflection and sharing practices. 
We next asked them to consider our scenarios, first from the 
perspective  of  the  sharer  and  then  the  recipient  (a VSD 
technique  first  used  by  Czekis  et  al.  [9]).  Finally,  we 
demonstrated each of our five interfaces on the activity data 
in  our  scenarios.  For  each,  we  again  asked  participants 
consider the perspective of the sharer and then the recipient. 
Interviews averaged 45 minutes (range 30-60). 

Participants 
We interviewed 12 participants (7 female) who regularly use 
pedometers.  Participants  were  recruited  from  university 
mailing  lists,  forums  for  well-known  pedometers,  and  the 
local Quantified Self forum. Participant averaged 34 years in 
age (range 23-53), averaged about 9,000 steps per day, and 
shared high-level activity summaries with an average of 4.33 
people (range 0-13). Common recipients included friends (6 
participants),  co-workers 
(3 
participants), and significant others (3 participants). Primary 
motivation varied: 4 had a weight loss goal, 3 wanted to be 
aware of daily activity, and 3 wanted to track activity to look 
for patterns. For their device, 9 used a FitBit, 2 a Jawbone 
UP, and 1 a mobile phone application. 

(6 participants), 

siblings 

Figure 3. The workflow of the Offset operation. 

count that would occur in the region after an offset versus the 
average step count at that same time of day in the historical 
data. We sort potential regions by this score and attempt to 
apply the offset to the region with the best score. 

To apply the offset, we use modify to search for a motif that 
matches the region and is within 10% of the desired steps. If 
no  motif  is  found  for  the  best-scoring  region,  we  try 
lower-scoring regions.  If  no  motif is  found for any region, 
we  recursively  apply  two  offsets  of  half  the  desired  size 
(as more  regions  will  be  available  for  a  smaller  offset). 
Because the offset must be exact, we linearly scale the results 
of the modify. Note this adjustment is small, as the identified 
motif is already within 10% of the offset. 

Implementation Details and Extensions 
Our prototypes are implemented in C#, using the Windows 
Presentation Framework, accessing  step data  via the  FitBit 
Intraday  API. Based on informal experimentation, our  add 
action currently adjusts activity 400 steps at a time. 

Although  our  current  implementation  is  effective  and 
certainly sufficient for our empirical investigation, it could 
also  be  extended.  Both  modify  and  offset  could  consider 
additional information when transforming activity regions. 

EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 
Continuing  our  VSD  approach,  we  next  conducted  an 
empirical  investigation  to  elicit  stakeholder  values  and 
concerns  and  to  evaluate  the  interfaces  developed  in  our 
technical investigation. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
We focus on findings that motivate design considerations in 
fine-grained physical activity sharing applications. 

Is Fine-Grained Data Private? 
Participants  held  a  range  of  views  on  whether  to  share 
fine-grained data: five wanted to keep it private at all times, 
three  felt  comfortable  sharing  with  close  friends,  and  four 
were  willing  to  open  it  to  anybody  interested.  Among 
participants interested in sharing, many found it important to 
differentiate  between  social  groups.  P3  stated,  “I  wouldn’t 
mind sharing [my fine-grained activity] with my girlfriend, 
but I wouldn’t want my professor to see it.” 

to  using 

The  transformation  presented  generally  did  not  influence 
participant  preferences  for  sharing  fine-grained  data.  The 
seven participants interested in fine-grained sharing did not 
object 
the  detailed  single-day  view.  Some 
participants were also interested in the limited hours view, as 
they believed it was accurate yet kept some activity private. 
Four participants said their activity outside of typical limited 
hours is usually minimal or otherwise  uninteresting, so not 
sharing it would be an improvement. 

Discussion 
We  anticipated  participants  would  react  positively  to  the 
transformations  developed  to  mitigate  privacy  concerns. 
However, participants remained concerned about with whom 
fine-grained data was shared. Because of the wide range of 
views  on  sharing  fine-grained  activity  data,  it  is  important 
any interface allow people to easily select whether to share 
and with whom to share. 

Session: Location-Based Services IIUbiComp’13, September 8–12, 2013, Zurich, Switzerland495 
Many participants discussed  context as an important factor 
in how they feel about sharing fine-grained data. Combining 
data  with  other  information,  such  as  a  user’s  Facebook 
stream or Twitter feed, raised additional concerns. Situations 
similar to Hunter not sharing his midday ride become more 
common when physical activity data can be combined with 
other  context-revealing  information,  such  as  check-ins  or 
status updates. 

Motivations to Share Fine-Grained Data 
Interviews  corroborated  the  motivations  for  fine-grained 
sharing  of  physical  activity  identified  in  our  conceptual 
investigation.  Current  participant  practices  are  consistent 
with  many  of  these  motivations,  which  suggests  they  are 
important motivations for sharing. 

For Accountability in Goals 
P4 and her co-workers are trying to be more active, so they 
compete  with  rewards  and  good-natured  punishments.  She 
uses sharing to increase accountability: “My teammates will 
know that I haven’t met my step goal, so that’s looming over 
my  head, ‘oh my  gosh, gotta get these steps in!’” She  was 
excited  about  opportunities  for  support:  “I  think  the  more 
information out there, the better. If it helps a friend of mine 
get more motivated and try to keep up with me...” 

Although  P6  did  not  see  value  in  fine-grained  data  for 
self-reflection  or  sharing,  he  discussed  sharing  as  a 
motivational tool. He said, “What I get out of having friends 
on FitBit… is just creating social pressure by reminding me 
that other people get more exercise than I do.” 

For Advice 
P11 wanted different avenues for giving and receiving advice 
on  activity.  Regarding  Ellen’s  scenario:  “If  she  has  other 
people  in  her  network  who  are  active,  they  could  say 
something  like,  ‘oh,  I  see  that  you  walk  after  dinner.  We 
should  just  start  walking  together.’”  When  considering 
giving advice to friends with which he shares, he suggested: 
“It’ll be like, ‘oh, you woke up really early. We should go to 
the gym tomorrow because we both get up really early.’” P10 
wanted  to  share  detailed  activity  in  a  public  online 
community to get feedback. He said, “That way I can get tips 
from people I don’t know as to like, during this time… you 
really didn’t have that much activity, or at this time you were 
really hitting that peak, what were you doing?” 

For Closeness 
Of three participants who shared with their significant other, 
none mentioned closeness as a motivation. However, P1 and 
her sister used FitBits in a competition with the goal of losing 
weight.  This  started  a  trend  toward  them  sharing  more  of 
their  daily  routines  with  one  another.  P7  suspected  from 
pedometer  activity  that  a  former  co-worker  with  recurring 
health  problems  had  another  incident:  “It  would  say,  like, 
‘oh, he got 2000 steps average for the week…’ oh my gosh, 
is  everything  ok?”  Although  her  friend  was  not  using  his 
pedometer to intentionally track his recovery progress,  she 
deduced his status from his activity level. 

Discussion 
Participants interested in fine-grained sharing seemed most 
motivated  by  advice  and  detailed  feedback,  which  we 
characterize as support and accountability in our conceptual 
investigation.  Although  participants  described  motivations 
around goal setting and closeness, they did not describe fine-
grained sharing as supporting these goals. Fine-grained data 
may  still  have  value  for  these  motivations,  but  strong 
conclusions  cannot  be  drawn  until  these  approaches  are 
deployed and examined in situ. 

What is Useful to Share? 
Two  participants  emphasized  sharing  data  that  recipients 
might  find  useful.  P11  was  willing  to  share  with  anybody 
interested,  but  focused  on  sharing  noteworthy  activity.  P2 
agreed, stating, “By default, I wouldn’t share anything unless 
I think it could in some way be useful to someone.” 

P9  was  concerned  about  oversharing,  especially  in  groups 
not centered on physical activity: “I am slightly proud of [my 
activity]…  there’s  always  the  issue  on  Facebook  of 
oversharing, TMI, versus not. I wouldn’t put everything up, 
but  like,  when  I  got  the  4000  flights  badge…”  P7  had  a 
firsthand  experience  with  oversharing,  and 
reacted 
accordingly:  “I  used  to post  [my  weekly  activity  report]  to 
Facebook… in the beginning we were all… giving each other 
posts and things, and that kind of tapered off.”  

Discussion 
Applications  should  help  avoid  oversharing.  Because 
frequent posts may overwhelm recipients, it should be easy 
to  select  with  whom  to  share.  Confining  detailed  data  to  a 
profile view may be a better alternative, while encouraging 
sharing  of  major  achievements  with  a  larger  audience. 
Interested  recipients  could  still  investigate  further  without 
the sharer needing to be concerned about oversharing. 

Deception 
Two  participants  stated  they  would  use  the  interfaces  that 
support interactive transformation of their data. However, it 
can be awkward for participants to state this so directly. We 
therefore  also  asked  whether  other  people  might  be 
interested  in  having  such  an  interface,  to  which  seven 
participants  agreed.  For  example,  P3  said,  “I  can  see  the 
benefit of having such a function, but for me, personally, I’ll 
just feel like a liar. I wouldn’t use it.” 

P12 liked the idea of the deletion interface, especially in the 
context of sharing with co-workers:  “If I’m working, and I 
don’t want anyone to know I was up at 2 o’clock. If I’m like, 
barely making it through the day... I don’t want my employer 
to  know  that.”  P4  expressed  interest  in  having  the  data 
transforming interface: “I would like that [transformation] is 
there… Even if it’s a bad thing. I would like that it would be 
there.” and offered an example use: “I sleepwalk a lot... if I 
hide that… it’s trying to protect [my fiancé]… it’s trying to 
keep him from worrying about me.” 

In  discussing  how  other  people  might  use  interactive 
transformation, P9 suggested a parent and child relationship 
as  an  appropriate  use:  “I  think  that  if  you  were  like,  FitBit 

Session: Location-Based Services IIUbiComp’13, September 8–12, 2013, Zurich, Switzerland496friends  with  your  mom…  I  think  doing  that  might  be  an 
interesting  way  to  keep  her  late-night  activity  [private].” 
Three participants discussed sharing with a coach or doctor, 
but  felt  transformation  was  not  appropriate  for  that 
relationship: “I wouldn’t want to do that either to my doctor 
or to myself. I want him to see the truth.” 

Discussion 
Participant  concerns  for  data  transformation  focused  on 
honesty. Although most did not offer examples of when they 
might use such capability in their own life, they were able to 
develop  other  scenarios.  Together  with  the  handful  of 
participants  who  expressed  explicit  interest,  this  suggests 
interactive  transformation  warrants  further  examination. 
Extended in situ availability may reveal new use scenarios.  

Effort Required 
Six  participants  were  concerned  interactive  deletion  and 
transformation required too much effort from the sharer. P1 
stated “People have so much going on in their lives to think, 
‘oh, someone might look at my FitBit data…’ it just seems 
like too much mental effort.” P8 thought it would be rarely 
used, but important: “this kind of feature is nice to have, but 
I think rarely used… but that one use would be so critical.” 
Two  participants  mentioned  concerns  about  remembering 
what  transformations  they  had  made  when  talking  to  their 
friends later. P11 noted: “That could be useful … there’s a 
heavier cognitive load. Because then I have to remember that 
what other people see is not what I see.” 

Discussion 
We developed the deletion and transformation interfaces to 
give  more  control  over  how  data  is  shared.  The  effort 
required  to  exert  that  control  is  a  concern  that  should  be 
explored  in  future  designs.  For  example,  a  system  might 
detect anomalous activity (e.g., Whitney’s unusual late night 
activity)  and  pro-actively  suggest  transformation.  This 
would reduce required effort, but preserve sharer control. 

Current  systems  generally  only  support  a  choice  between 
sharing  or  not  sharing,  which  we  believe  is  too  limiting. 
Some participants offered additional approaches. P2 and P4 
both suggested a view revealing an intermediate amount of 
information based on typical trends. P2 suggests: “just your 
general  patterns,  ‘I’m  more  of  a  morning  person  or  an 
evening  person’,  kind  of  like  sharing  a  profile”.  P4  says: 
“I think that would be awesome! I like seeing how often I’m 
active and how many steps I’ve gotten per hour.” 

DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS 
Through  our 
empirical 
conceptual, 
investigations,  we  developed  a  set  of  considerations  for 
applications that share fine-grained physical activity data. 

technical, 

and 

Mitigate Oversharing 
Multiple participants expressed concern about  oversharing. 
We  suspect  that  this  can  be  improved  with  a  more  tiered 
approach.  A  Facebook-style  news  feed  of  the  detailed 
physical activity of friends may be overwhelming, but it may 
be  more  appropriate  to  display  major  accomplishments  or 
events  and  allow  recipients  to  seek  more  detail  as  desired. 

This could place detailed activity where interested recipients 
could find it, without overwhelming others. 

Emphasize Effortless Sharing 
Participants felt interactive transformation required too much 
effort. Some reported that, if  concerned about  privacy in a 
particular instance, they would perhaps share a higher-level 
summary.  They  believed  this  supports  honesty  while 
reducing both the time and effort required. But as we have 
previously noted, unexpectedly not sharing can also present 
challenges  for  recipient  trust.  Designs  that  enable  more 
transformation  can  be 
pro-active  or  even  automatic 
envisioned  (e.g.,  detecting  unusual  activity  and  suggesting 
hiding or transforming it). Designs might also automatically 
consider  other  contextual  information  (e.g.,  the  location  of 
activity). Further research should explore implications of and 
reactions to such designs. 

Support Intermediate Levels of Sharing 
Some  participants  felt  5-minute  step  intervals  infringed 
privacy by allowing inference of too much about a sharer’s 
activity. But participants suggested new intermediate points 
between  this  and  current  high-level  summaries.  Sharers 
might configure intermediate intervals (e.g., steps per hour) 
or share high-level summaries about their activity  patterns. 
Such  intermediate  representations  may  help  some  sharers 
balance support and accountability with their privacy.  

CONCLUSION 
We have used Value Sensitive Design to investigate human 
values and tensions in interfaces for fine-grained sharing of 
sensed  physical  activity  data.  By  developing  scenarios  to 
highlight  value  tensions  and  stakeholders,  we  captured  the 
results of  our conceptual  investigations in  a  more concrete 
form.  Our  technical  investigations  examined  how  a  set  of 
transformations relate to our value tensions and developed a 
novel  approach  to  interactive  transformation  that  allows 
removing  private  data  while  preserving  data  invariants 
important  to  the  benefits  of  sharing.  We  then  conducted 
value-oriented  semi-structured  interviews  and  learned  how 
people  respond 
to  fine-grained  sharing.  Finally,  we 
enumerate design considerations for future applications. 

Further  evaluation  of  this  value  sensitive  approach  would 
strengthen  our  ability 
to  make  prescriptive  design 
recommendations. Future work would extend the empirical 
investigation to a field deployment, allowing participants to 
experience  real-world  reactions  to  transforming  their  data. 
The  field  deployment  would  also  assess  whether  the 
interactive transformation is effective in actual use. 

We  have  explored  only  fine-grained  pedometer  data,  but 
other  domains  may  also  benefit  from  fine-grained  sharing. 
For  example,  the  StepGreen  and  UbiGreen  applications 
explore  high-level  sharing  in  environmental  applications 
[13,28].  Disaggregated  sensing  could  enable  fine-grained 
sharing of in-home utility usage [14,15], which may increase 
support  and  accountability.  One  direction  for  future  work 
will  be  investigating  values  and  value  tensions  in  other 
domains to generalize the insights developed here. 

Session: Location-Based Services IIUbiComp’13, September 8–12, 2013, Zurich, Switzerland497ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  thank  Felicia  Cordeiro,  Yoshi  Kohno,  Katie  Kuksenok, 
Anthony LaMarca, and Sean Munson for feedback throughout this 
project.  We  also  thank  the  organizers  and  participants  of  the 
Dagstuhl Seminar 12492 on Human Activity Recognition in Smart 
Environments. This work is sponsored in part by the Intel Science 
and  Technology  Center  for  Pervasive  Computing  and  by  the 
National Science Foundation under award OAI-1028195. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Bales, E., Li, K.A., and Griswold, W. CoupleVIBE: Mobile 

Implicit Communication to Improve Awareness for (Long-
Distance) Couples. CSCW 2011, 65–74. 

2.  Barkhuus, L. and Dey, A. Location-Based Services for 

Mobile Telephony: A Study of Users’ Privacy Concerns. 
Interact 2003, 207–212. 

3.  Berlin, E. and Van Laerhoven, K. Detecting Leisure 

Activities with Dense Motif Discovery. UbiComp 2012, 250–
259. 

4.  Camp, J. and Connelly, K. Beyond Consent: Privacy in 
Ubiquitous Computing (Ubicomp). In Digital Privacy: 
Theory, Technologies, and Practices. Auerbach Publications, 
New York and London, 2008, 327–343. 

5.  Choe, E.K., Consolvo, S., Watson, N.F., and Kientz, J.A. 
Opportunities for Computing Technologies to Support 
Healthy Sleep Behaviors. CHI 2011, 3053–3062. 

6.  Consolvo, S., Everitt, K., Smith, I., and Landay, J.A. Design 
Requirements for Technologies that Encourage Physical 
Activity. CHI 2006, 457–466. 

7.  Consolvo, S., Smith, I.E., Matthews, T., LaMarca, A., and 

Tabert, J. Location Disclosure to Social Relations: Why, 
When, & What People Want to Share. CHI 2005, 81–90. 
8.  Cornwell, J., Fette, I., Hsieh, G., Prabaker, M., Rao, J., Tang, 
K., Vaniea, K., Bauer, L., Cranor, L., Hong, J., McLaren, B., 
Reiter, M., and Sadeh, N. User-Controllable Security and 
Privacy for Pervasive Computing. HotMobile 2007, 14–19. 

9.  Czeskis, A., Dermendjieva, I., Yapit, H., Borning, A., 

Friedman, B., Gill, B., and Kohno, T. Parenting from the 
Pocket : Value Tensions and Technical Directions for Secure 
and Private Parent-Teen Mobile Safety. SOUPS 2010. 

10.  FitBit. http://www.fitbit.com/. 
11.  Friedman, B., Kahn, P.H., and Borning, A. Value Sensitive 
Design and Information Systems. Human-Computer 
Interaction and Management Information Systems: 
Foundations, (2006), 348–372. 

12.  Friedman, B., Smith, I., Kahn, P.H., Consolvo, S., and 

Selawski, J. Development of a Privacy Addendum for Open 
Source Licenses: Value Sensitive Design in Industry. 
UbiComp 2006, 194–211. 

13.  Froehlich, J., Dillahunt, T., and Klasnja, P. UbiGreen: 

Investigating a Mobile Tool for Tracking and Supporting 
Green Transportation Habits. CHI 2009, 1043–1052. 
14.  Froehlich, J., Larson, E., Campbell, T., Haggerty, C., 

Fogarty, J., and Patel, S.N. HydroSense: Infrastructure-
Mediated Single-Point Sensing of Whole-Home Water 
Activity. UbiComp 2009, 235–244. 

15.  Gupta, S., Reynolds, M., and Patel, S. ElectriSense: Single-

Point Sensing Using EMI for Electrical Event Detection and 
Classification in the Home. UbiComp 2010, 139–148. 

16.  Hays, J. and Efros, A.A. Scene Completion Using Millions of 

Photographs. SIGGRAPH 2007. 

17.  Hwang, K.O., Ottenbacher, A.J., Green, A.P., Cannon-Diehl, 
M.R., Richardson, O., Bernstam, E. V, and Thomas, E.J. 
Social Support in an Internet Weight Loss Community. 

International Journal of Medical Informatics 79, 1 (2010), 5–
13. 

18.  Iachello, G., Smith, I., Consolvo, S., Abowd, G.D., Howard, 
J., Potter, F., Scott, J., Sohn, T., Hightower, J., and LaMarca, 
A. Control, Deception, and Communication: Evaluating the 
Deployment of a Location-Enhanced Messaging Service. 
UbiComp 2005, 213–231. 

19.  Jawbone UP. http://jawbone.com/up. 
20.  Kay, M., Choe, E., Shepherd, J., Greenstein, B., Watson, N., 
Consolvo, S., and Kientz, J.A. Lullaby: A Capture & Access 
System for Understanding the Sleep Environment. UbiComp 
2012, 226–234. 

21.  Klasnja, P., Consolvo, S., Choudhury, T., and Beckwith, R. 
Exploring Privacy Concerns about Personal Sensing. 
Pervasive 2009, 176–183. 

22.  Klasnja, P., Consolvo, S., McDonald, D.W., Landay, J.A., 

and Pratt, W. Using Mobile & Personal Sensing 
Technologies to Support Health Behavior Change in 
Everyday Life: Lessons Learned. AMIA 2009, 338–342. 
23.  Kostakos, V., Venkatanathan, J., and Reynold, B. Who’s 
Your Best Friend? Targeted Privacy Attacks In Location-
Sharing Social Networks. UbiComp 2011, 177–186. 

24.  Krumm, J. Inference Attacks on Location Tracks. Pervasive 

2007, 127–143. 

25.  Li, I., Dey, A., and Forlizzi, J. A Stage-Based Model of 
Personal Informatics Systems. CHI 2010, 557–566. 

26.  Lin, J., Keogh, E., Lonardi, S., and Patel, P. Finding Motifs 

in Time Series. SIGKDD 2002, 53–68. 

27.  Lin, J.J., Mamykina, L., Lindtner, S., Delajoux, G., and 

Strub, H.B. Fish’ n’ Steps: Encouraging Physical Activity 
with an Interactive Computer Game. UbiComp 2006, 261–
278. 

28.  Mankoff, J., Fussell, S.R., Dillahunt, T., Glaves, R., Grevet, 

C., Johnson, M., Matthews, D., Matthews, H.S., Mcguire, R., 
Thompson, R., Shick, A., and Setlock, L. StepGreen.org: 
Increasing Energy Saving Behaviors via Social Networks. 
ICWSM 2010, 106–113. 

29.  Minnen, D. and Starner, T. Discovering Characteristic 

Actions from On-Body Sensor Data. ISWC 2006, 11–18. 
30.  Munson, S.A. and Consolvo, S. Exploring Goal-Setting, 

Rewards, Self-Monitoring, and Sharing to Motivate Physical 
Activity. PervasiveHealth 2012, 25–32. 
31.  MyFitnessPal. http://www.myfitnesspal.com/. 
32.  Mynatt, E.D., Rowan, J., Jacobs, A., and Craighill, S. Digital 
Family Portraits : Supporting Peace of Mind for Extended 
Family Members. CHI 2001, 333–340. 

33.  Page, X., Knijnenburg, B., and Kobsa, A. What a Tangled 

Web We Weave: Lying Backfires in Location-Sharing Social 
Media. CSCW 2013, 273–284. 

34.  Skeels, M.M., Unruh, K.T., Powell, C., and Pratt, W. 

Catalyzing Social Support for Breast Cancer Patients. CHI 
2010, 173–182. 

35.  Sweeney, L. K-Anonymity: A Model for Protecting Privacy. 

International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness and 
Knowledge-Based Systems 10, 05 (2002), 557–570. 

36.  Tang, K.P., Lin, J., Hong, J.I., Siewiorek, D.P., and Sadeh, N. 

Rethinking Location Sharing: Exploring the Implications of 
Social-Driven vs. Purpose-Driven Location Sharing. 
UbiComp 2010, 85–94. 

37.  Toscos, T., Faber, A., Connelly, K., and Upoma, A.M. 

Encouraging Physical Activity in Teens: Can Technology 
Help Reduce Barriers to Physical Activity in Adolescent 
Girls? PervasiveHealth 2008, 218–221.  

Session: Location-Based Services IIUbiComp’13, September 8–12, 2013, Zurich, Switzerland498 
