FutureSelf: What Happens When We Forecast 
Self-Trackers’ Future Health Statuses?

Saeyoung Rho, Injung Lee, Hankyung Kim, Jonghyuk Jung, 
Hyungi Kim, Bong Gwan Jun, Youn-kyung Lim
KAIST (Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology)
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{saeyoung.rho, edndn, hkkim31, jonghyuk101, roy83kim, bonggwan, younlim}@kaist.ac.kr

ABSTRACT
The  adoption  of self-tracking services  to  improve  health-
related behavior is increasing. Although psychologists claim 
that thinking about the future has a motivational impact on 
current  behavior  and  cognition,  few  studies  have  explored
using future forecast in self-tracking services. In this paper, 
we explore how future forecast information can be used in
the  design  of self-tracking  services.  We  conducted a  four-
week study that qualitatively investigated  11  participants’
perceptions of and practices with future forecast information.
Participants  used the  FutureSelf  app that we  developed, 
which  forecasts  dieters’ future  weights and expected goal 
achievement  rates based  on  their  current  behavior. The 
findings reveal that predicting future weight based on prior 
performance  induced  participants  to  imagine  their  future 
selves and reminded them of their ultimate goals. In fact, the 
predictions  became  the  participants’  primary  source  of 
motivation.  We  also  suggest  design  implications  for self-
tracking services that forecast users’ future statuses.

Author Keywords
Consequence Information; User Experience; Design; Health; 
Activity Tracker; Self-Tracking; Personal Informatics.

ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.

INTRODUCTION
As  Ebenezer  Scrooge  says  after  seeing  the  Ghost  of 
Christmas  Yet  to  Come  in  the  novel  A  Christmas  Carol,
“Men's  courses  will  foreshadow  certain  ends,  to  which,  if 
persevered in, they must lead, but if the courses be departed 
from, the ends will change. Say it is thus with what you show 
me  [9].”  After  being  visited  by  ghosts  showing  his  future, 
Scrooge  realizes  that  he  will  meet  with  a  tragic  end  if  he 
continues to be cold and miserly, and it transforms him into 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not  made  or
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work
owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org.
DIS 2017, June 10-14, 2017, Edinburgh, United Kingdom 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-4922-2/17/06…$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3064663.3064676

a changed man. He compares his future image as shown to 
him by ghosts to what he actually wants to be. The difference 
between these two images acts as a new stimulus, persuading 
him to change his behavior. This phenomenon was already 
studied  by  psychologists;  they report  that  considering 
possible 
individual’s  current 
influences  an 
cognitive/emotional state and goal-setting behavior [17]. 

futures 

Designers  in  the  human-computer  interaction  (HCI)  field 
have  studied  how  to  design  self-tracking  services  to  better 
induce, improve, and maintain health behavior change. One 
popular approach is to express self-tracking data in a more 
understandable and actionable way for users. Since thinking 
about the future affects motivation, predicting the future can 
be a viable approach to helping health behavior change. Self-
tracking services also offer the potential to predict the future 
of the user. Self-tracking services store a wealth of personal 
health  data  that  can  be  used  to  generate  predictions  by 
adopting  advanced  medical  understanding.  However,  the 
information provided by current services is mainly related to 
past performance, not allowing people to imagine the future.

To  explore  how people’s  experiences  with  self-tracking 
services change as they gain access to predictive information, 
we devised a study in the form of a four-week weight-loss 
program and recruited 11 people who wanted to lose weight.
Participants  were  asked  to  track  their  activities  and  food 
intake  using  a  wearable  activity  tracker  and  to  use  the
FutureSelf app, which forecasts the future consequences of 
continuing current behavior by analyzing the collected data. 
Interviews  and  journaling  were  employed  to  qualitatively 
probe participants’ experiences both with and without future 
consequence  information  with  respect  to  how  they  set  and
changed goals, how they planned strategies to satisfy these 
goals, and what motivated them to engage in certain behavior 
to  achieve  their  goals.  As  a  result,  we  determined  that 
forecasting future weight based on current self-tracked data 
motivates users to change their behavior.

This paper makes following contributions: First, we suggest 
a  new  type  of  information  to  represent  self-tracked  data, 
which we term consequence information, i.e., the predicted 
future  information  based  on  collected  data. Second,  we 
reveal that this type of information can help increase users’ 
motivation  to  engage  in  healthy  behavior through  in-depth 
qualitative  user  studies,  and propose  several  points  to 
consider when designing such type of information.

Quantified SelfDIS 2017, June 10–14, 2017, Edinburgh, UK637RELATED WORK

Potential of Imagining the Future in Behavior Change
Psychologists have already sought to bridge the gap between 
people’s conceptions of the future and their current statuses. 
There  are  two  different  ways that  people  conceive  their 
futures. One way is to imagine possible selves, conjecturing 
how they might act, look, or feel in the future [7]. People may 
construct positive (want to achieve) or feared (want to avoid) 
selves, and individuals’ knowledge, moods, and expectations 
affect  the  construction  of  those  possible  selves.  In  this 
process, people who imagine the future more explicitly are 
more confident that the future event will happen and tend to 
do more things that can catalyze it [1, 30]. In addition, people 
felt  more  motivated  when  a  fictional  future  story  was 
described from the third-person perspective rather than from 
the first-person perspective [35]. Additionally, Oettingen et 
al.  distinguished  expectation  from  fantasy,  verifying  that 
expectation  has  a  greater  motivational  impact  [21].  These 
studies imply that a conception of the future based on more 
objective criteria can better motivate people.

The second way that people can imagine their futures is to be 
reminded  of  their  goals.  When  people  set  a goal,  they 
fabricate  several  possible  futures,  select  the  one  they  most 
prefer, and conceive a plan to achieve that end state [3, 20]. 
Thus, a goal is a representation of a desired future and can 
motivate  people,  guide  their  behavior,  and  elicit  better 
performance  [2,  11].  “The  future,  as  represented  by  goals, 
exerts a major influence on current behavior [17, p. 595].” 
Based on the potential of predicting people’s future behavior 
changes, we suggest that the investigation of how people’s 
experience  is  influenced  when  images  of  their  futures  are 
conceived in an objective and unbiased manner is important.

Limitations in Self-Tracked Data Interpretation
A large number of self-tracking services are available in the 
form  of  activity  trackers  and  diet  logging  apps  that  help 
people  collect  and  reflect  on  their  personal  information  to 
foster  health  behavior  changes.  However,  limitations  exist 
regarding how  people  interpret  self-tracked data. Although 
the ultimate goal of health behavior change occurs over the 
long  term,  self-tracked  data  are  currently  employed  with 
reference  to  short-term  goals  and  decision-making  [29].  In 
addition,  people  cannot  fully  exploit  the  data  to  gain 
insights—not due to a lack of collected data, but because they 
lack the methodology for proper interpretation [8].

Providing  people  with  the  expected  consequences  of 
continuing their current behavior based on self-tracked data 
may eliminate the limitations in interpreting the data. If we 
forecast  a  dieter’s  future  weight,  that  forecast  can  be 
connected to a long-term goal (to lose weight), rather than to 
a  short-term  goal  (to  have  salad  for  lunch).  Additionally, 
people do not need to contemplate their self-tracked data to 
conjecture  the  consequences  of  their  current  behavior; 
instead,  the  system  can  analyze  the  self-tracked  data  and 
make predictions for them.

Forecasting the Future in Current Self-Tracking Services
Although  many  self-tracking  services  help  users  set  and 
attain  their  goals,  current  self-tracking  services  do  not 
attempt to forecast a user’s future status based on his or her 
current  behavior.  A  few  services  provide  some  futuristic 
information; however, they do not reflect the consequences 
of  users  continuing  their  current  behavior.  “Noom  Coach
(https://www.noom.com/about/)”,  which  is  a  smartphone 
app for dieters intended to help them develop better eating 
habits and lose weight, provides a tailored plan for users to 
follow  after  they  set  a  goal  weight.  The  plan  includes 
suggestions such as how many steps to walk. The app tells 
users that if they stick to the plan, they will be able to reach 
their goal. However, it does not predict the future based on a 
user’s current behavior.

Another  application  is  “UP  by  Jawbone (https://jawbone.
com/up)”, which is a smartphone app that gathers data from 
users’ fitness trackers to analyze and display information. It 
offers a “Smart Coach” function that provides personalized 
advice to help users make better choices. For instance, the 
Smart  Coach  might  say  “It’s  almost  time  for  bed.  Getting 
ready now will help you get in bed by your 23:15 bedtime.” 
Smart Coach analyzes a user’s current behavior to deliver the 
best advice and meaningful insights but delivers it more as a 
suggestion  than  as  a  predicted  consequence  of  a  user’s 
behavior.

Suggesting  healthier  behavior  can  be  helpful,  but  many 
scholars in the HCI field have discussed the subject of user 
autonomy in ubiquitous technology. Rogers has pointed that 
we  are  becoming  more  dependent on  technology;  thus, we 
need to design new technologies to encourage people to be 
proactive in their lives [28]. Forecasting future consequences 
has  the  potential  to  provide  users  with  opportunities  to  set 
their own goals; rather than assigning a goal, the technology 
provides  information  to  aid  users’  own  goal  setting. 
Forecasting benefits from  technology being  able  to predict 
the  future,  but  leaves  the  goal-setting  process  to  the 
individuals.

DEFINITION  OF  CONSEQUENCE  INFORMATION (CI)
AND PERFORMANCE INFORMATION (PI)
To clarify what we have termed “the future consequence”, 
we define Consequence Information (CI) as follows:

(cid:121) CI: Information showing a consequence of an anticipated
activity,  measured  from the  average  speed  of  an 
activity observed from the past up to the present.

As  opposed  to  the  concept  of  CI,  we  refer  to  the  user 
performance  data accumulated  from  the  past  up  to  the 
present,  which  is  the  most  common  method  for  reporting 
self-tracked  data  in  existing  services,  as  Performance 
Information (PI) and define it as follows:

(cid:121) PI:  Information  showing  a  person’s  performance  of  an 
activity completed from the past to the present.

Quantified SelfDIS 2017, June 10–14, 2017, Edinburgh, UK638FutureSelf App Development
In the FutureSelf app system, the activity tracker Fitbit Flex 
was  employed  to  log  the  participants’  daily  activities  and 
food intake using built-in functions, and the messaging app 
Telegram was employed to send messages (Figure 2). First, 
users manually input their age, gender, current weight, height, 
goal calorie intake/burn, and wakeup/bedtime information to 
the FutureSelf app. Next, the FutureSelf app connects to the 
user’s Fitbit server to collect caloric intake/consumption data. 
Then, it generates messages based on those data. To contrast 
experiences  with  and  without  CI,  the  FutureSelf  app 
produces  not  only  the  CI  messages  but  also  messages  that 
report  only the  accumulated  user  performance  data  (e.g., 
caloric intake). It sends the messages to users at designated 
times.  To  reduce  bias  from  visual  elements or  a  nuance, 
information was delivered as short text messages in a neutral 
tone, without any compliment or criticism.

Figure 2. Data flow diagram of the FutureSelf app

To obtain PI, we need to select a certain point of time in the 
past. For instance, if we choose the timepoint as 00:00 today, 
PI corresponds to what Sarah has completed from 00:00 up 
to the present. If she walked 7,000 steps during that interval, 
her performance can be described as follows: 1) Sarah has 
walked 7,000 steps so far; and 2) she has achieved 70% of 
her daily step goal if her goal was to walk 10,000 steps a day.

The FutureSelf app generates PI and two types of CI (Figure 
3). The PI describes caloric intake/consumption because this 
information  is  a  fundamental  factor  with  regard  to  weight 
loss. Since we initially did not know how CI would work, we 
created  two  types  of  CI  and  aimed  to  explore  how  the 
participants  experience  two  types  of  CI:  goal  achievement 
rate CI (Rate CI) and future weight CI (Weight CI). Rate CI 
is  calculated  by  comparing  a  user’s  goal  for  caloric 
intake/consumption  to  that  user’s  expected  future  caloric 
intake/consumption. This calculation assumes that a user will 
make a linear progression during waking hours. Weight CI is 
produced  using  the  weight-loss  calculator, which  predicts 
future weight by modeling the correlations between people’s 
weight changes and information about age, gender, current 
weight, height, and calorie reductions/increases [34].

The  FutureSelf  app  sends  push  notifications  30  minutes 
before sending PI and CI to induce manual logging (Figure 
3)  [4].  The  FutureSelf  app  creates  its  messages  based  on 
users’ updated Fitbit data, and the time lag between the actual 
behavior and the logging is reduced to avoid recall bias and
produce more accurate data [6].

Figure 1. Definition of Consequence Information (CI)

The average speed of an activity (e.g., walking 10,000 steps
per day) means the pace at which behavioral data have been
accrued—such as a person’s number of steps per day or daily 
caloric intake—from a past timepoint to the present (Figure 
1). This value is used as a base to predict one’s future activity; 
we  assume  that  a user  will  maintain  the  same  speed of 
activity up to  a  certain  moment  in  the  future.  Given  this 
information,  we  can  obtain  CI  by  predicting the  future 
consequences based on the speed of the expected activities.

Consider Sarah (female, 60 kg), who tracks her step count. 
She walked between 7,000 and 12,000 steps each day, and 
her average step count per day over the past week was 10,000 
steps per day. Thus, if we assume that Sarah will maintain 
the same speed of activity, she will walk 70,000 steps during 
the next week. A variety of consequences can be expected
from  this  prediction:  1)  she  will  reach  70%  of  her  weekly 
step goal if her goal was to walk 100,000 steps in a week; 2) 
she  will  burn  approximately  3,000 kcal  if  she  maintains  a 
pace of 5 km/h [16]. She can obtain different types of CI by 
tracking diverse health-related data. By  defining  CI  in  this 
manner, we can predict individuals’ possible futures that are 
grounded in self-tracked data. CI is not a lie; it is a probable 
future state that can act to amplify the effect of a person’s 
past performance. The future prediction length is adjustable
to vary the size of amplification.

STUDY DESIGN
We  devised  a  study  to  probe  how  the  participants  interact 
with  CI;  the  study  focused  on  the  weight-loss-related 
behavior of dieters. CI can be clearly expressed for weight 
loss  because  people  trying  to  lose  weight  tend  to  quantify 
their  desired  weight  goals  (e.g.,  50  kg).  Furthermore,  a 
wearable activity tracker can provide adequate information 
to predict  future weight,  e.g.,  caloric  intake  and burn  data. 
The FutureSelf app was developed as an example of how a 
self-tracking  service  can  provide  CI  to  dieters.  The 
FutureSelf  app  accesses  a  user’s  personal  data,  generates 
messages  based  on  these  data  and  sends  the  messages  to 
users. By adopting the FutureSelf app, the study was devised 
as a one-month weight-loss program, and people who wanted 
to lose weight by tracking their daily activity and food intake 
were recruited. During the study, journaling and five semi-
structured interviews were conducted. And a year after the 
study,  one  follow-up  interview was conducted in  order  to 
enable the participants to provide more objective reflection 
of their experience of this concept. 

Quantified SelfDIS 2017, June 10–14, 2017, Edinburgh, UK639Group

P#

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9

Group 
A

Group 
B

BMI (Weight)

Age, 
gender
23, M 22.34 (78.3 kg)
23, F
20.60 (54.4 kg)
25, M 23.20 (77.7 kg)
22.73 (58.2 kg)
23, F
29, M 24.49 (74.9 kg)
23, F
20.22 (56.6 kg)
22, M 21.40 (67.8 kg)
28, F
20.73 (51.1 kg)
28, M 24.18 (70.7 kg)

P10

P11

25, F

21.33 (54.6 kg)

27, M 24.58 (65.3 kg)

Table 1. Participants’ information

Weight-
loss goal
-1.0 kg
-2.0 kg
-4.7 kg
-3.0 kg
-5.0 kg
-1.6 kg
-1.0 kg
-1.0 kg
-1.0 kg

-1.5 kg

-5.0 kg

Study Setup
In  the  beginning  of  the  study,  we  planned  to  observe  two 
weeks first, and then change into the most suitable settings 
to  inquire  design  implications for  CI. Participants  were 
divided into two groups in order to clearly understand how 
the experience of CI is different from the experience without 
CI. During the first three weeks of the study, we provided CI 
only  to  Group  B  and  concentrated  on  comparing  the 
experience between Groups A and B to find out the unique 
potential  of  CI.  After  two weeks of observation, we  found 
that the participants experienced Weight CI and Rate CI in
profoundly  different  ways.  Weight  CI  led  participants  to 
believe that their weight-loss goal was more attainable and, 
thus, motivated them, whereas Rate CI did not show such an 
impact: (P10, week 1; CI provided) “I liked the percent value 
(Rate  CI),  but,  it  seemed natural after  few  days. However, 
after seeing this digitized value (Weight CI), I thought, oh, 
really?  Can  I  lose  weight  if  I  continue  this?  No,  but,  no  I 
didn’t agree, I doubted it, but I became strong-minded. I was 
very motivated to do so.”

in  what  ways Weight  CI motivated 

Thus, in the third week, we changed the CI setup to better 
investigate 
the 
participants to keep exercise and control diet. In the last week, 
Group B stopped receiving CI, whereas Group A started to 
receive  CI.  Each  group’s  interview  results of  the  4th week
were compared to the interview results of that same group’s 
first three weeks, rather than making a comparison between 
Groups A  and  B. In  this way,  all  participants were  able  to 
experience  both  situations—both  with  and  without  CI.  We 
asked participants in Group B what they missed most in the 
last  week  without  CI  and  asked  Group  A  what  they  found 
most interesting in the last week with CI.

Message Generation (CI setup)
The FutureSelf  app  sends  push  notifications  to  users  four 
times a day; twice (15:00 and 24:00) to provide PI and/or CI 
and twice (14:30 and 23:30) to request Fitbit synchronization 
and  manual 
times  were  selected  by 
considering  participants’  normal  routines;  all  participants 
typically went to bed after midnight, had lunch between 12 

logging.  These 

Figure 3. Examples of FutureSelf app message (screenshot)

Participant Recruiting
To observe various situations in which CI is addressed, we 
aimed to recruit participants with diverse qualities in terms 
of current weight, body mass index (BMI), and weight-loss 
goal. Five selection conditions were imposed on participants 
by conducting a preliminary survey. First, people who were 
already  on  a  diet  were  excluded  because  time  factors  may 
affect  people’s  engagement  levels  of  weight  loss  [33]. 
Second, people who require clinical support were excluded 
since the goal was to observe how people manage their health 
behavior using their volition. Thus, people with a BMI that 
exceeded  25  were  not  selected  because 
they  were 
recommended  to consider  clinical  support  [10,  33].  Third, 
people with a BMI less than 18.5 after achieving their goal 
weight were not selected because the prediction tool that we 
employed  did  not  offer  predicted  weight  values  for  BMI 
values  less  than  18.5,  which  indicates  that  a  person  is 
underweight. Fourth, people in approximately the same age 
range  were  selected  since  physical  condition  can  affect 
weight-loss  performance.  Last,  people  with  similar 
lunchtimes  and  bedtimes  were  selected  since  message 
receiving times may affect the use of information.

This  study  was  advertised  on  online  communities  where 
many  local  people  spend  time.  All  the  participants  were 
required  to  accomplish  and  adhere  to  four  major  tasks;  1) 
track daily activity and food intake using Fitbit, 2) check all
messages from the FutureSelf app, 3) complete a short diet 
journal using online notes, and 4) participate in five weekly 
interviews.  As  a  reward,  those  who  completed  the  study 
received the activity trackers we provided for the study. Six
men  and  six  women  in  their  twenties  were  recruited  from 
among 110 applicants and were divided into two groups with 
even  distributions  of  age,  gender,  and  BMI  (Table  1). 
However, one participant dropped out due to lack of active 
participation; therefore, the final analysis included data for 
11  participants.  The  average  BMI  was  22.3  in  Group  A 
(SD=1.62) and 22.4 in Group B (SD=1.81).

Quantified SelfDIS 2017, June 10–14, 2017, Edinburgh, UK640PM to 2 PM, and did not eat a regular breakfast. Thus, we 
aimed to have them check the first message after finishing 
lunch and the second message before going to bed. The CI 
included in messages varied between weeks and the time at 
which the messages were sent (Table 2).

In the first two weeks, we sent Rate CI from Sunday to Friday 
because we assumed no large differences among the Weight 
CI  if  we  provided  it  every  day. Messages  sent  at  15:00 
predicted  participants’  daily  goal  achievement  rates,  and 
messages  sent  at  24:00  predicted  their  weekly  goal 
achievement rates. By doing this, we expected participants to 
plan the remainder of their day at 15:00 and to plan the rest 
of  the  week  at  24:00.  On  Saturdays,  we  sent  Weight  CI 
messages, which predicted participants’ future weights at the 
end  of  the  study.  These  weights  were  calculated  on  the 
assumption  that  the  participant  would  repeat  the  same 
performance as during the past week.

In  the  last  two  weeks,  we  decided  to  focus  on  Weight  CI 
because  we  found that  Weight  CI  has  greater  motivating 
power than Rate CI. Thus, we sent Weight CI at 24:00 every 
day to predict a person’s weight at the end of the study based 
on  their  performance  for  this  day.  To  investigate  the 
influence of  time  represented  in  Weight  CI  on  the  user 
experience, we provided Weight CI predicting body weight 
two  months  after  the  start  date  based  on  this  week's 
performance on Saturday.

Journaling, Interviews, and Data Analysis
We  conducted  six  personal  semi-structured 
interview 
sessions per participant: five during the study and one a year
after the study. The first five interviews were conducted at 
one-week intervals. The first interview was conducted face-
to-face  on  the  day  before  the  program  began.  Participants 
were asked to measure their body composition and bring the 
result  sheet  to  this  interview.  A  moderator  asked  the 
participants questions about their previous experiences with 
weight  loss,  other  health-related  self-tracking  services  that 
they had used, and why they wanted to lose weight. Then, 
each  participant  set  a  calorie  intake/burn  goal  with  the 
moderator’s help based on their body composition data.

During  the  four  weeks,  participants  were  asked  to  write  a 
short diet journal at the end of each day using a shared online 
notebook  (Evernote)  so  that  we  could  conduct  interviews 
based on the journal entries. In the journal, participants were 
Time period selected to calculate 
the average speed of activity

Week

Time

Week 
1&2

Week 
3&4

15:00

24:00

24:00, Sat.

15:00

24:00

24:00, Sat.

15 hours

A day

A week

15 hours

A day

A week

asked  to  write  down  the  most  impressive  FutureSelf 
messages,  their  daily  diet/workout  goal,  their  strategy  to 
meet that goal, and reasons for each response. In the three 
subsequent interviews, which were conducted by phone, we 
asked  what  the  participants  did  after  they  checked  the 
messages, how they utilized the information in the messages, 
whether they instituted any changes in their way of thinking 
or  their  lives  due  to  the  messages,  what  metaphors they 
would use to describe their impressions of the FutureSelf app, 
if they encountered any changes in their goals and diet plans, 
and  how  satisfied  they  were  with  their  previous  week’s 
performance.

In the fifth face-to-face interview, in addition to asking the 
same questions as in the previous telephone interviews, we 
requested participants to compare the experiences of weeks 
3 and 4 regarding their confidence, motivation, and pictured 
future  self-image.  We  conducted  a  generative  session  to 
discuss  redesigning  FutureSelf  messages  to  investigate 
participants’ underlying needs for another type of CI or their 
preferences for message settings.

interview 

took  place  one  year  after 

The  final 
the 
discontinuation  of  the  FutureSelf  app.  This  follow-up 
interview was conducted in the summer, just like the main 
study,  so  participants  were  considering  diet.  Through  this 
interview  session,  we  investigated  how  participants  were 
affected by their previous CI experience when they were not 
exposed to CI. We also observed the participants' objective 
responses to their CI experience. Ten of the 11 participants 
responded to the interview request, and each interview lasted 
approximately 30 minutes.

Audio recordings were made of all interviews (27+ hours), 
and  the  recordings  were  transcribed  within  2  days  of each 
interview session. We separately analyzed the data collected 
when  CI  was  provided  and  the  data  when  CI  was  not 
provided, and extracted the influence of CI on weight-loss-
related behavior by comparing those two groups of data. Our 
data  were  iteratively  open  and  axial  coded  until  we  had 
clearly 
that  emerged.  Affinity 
issues 
diagramming was also conducted to categorize those issues. 
Three  of  the  authors  who  conducted  the  interviews  were 
mainly  responsible  for  analyzing  the  data;  after  individual 
analysis, the three interviewers analyzed all the data together.

identified 

the 

Future timepoint represented in CI

Type of CI (unit)

24:00 (the end of the day)

Saturday (the end of the week)

A month after the start date

24:00 (the end of the day)

A month after the start date

2 months after the start date

Rate CI (%)

Weight (kg)

Rate CI (%)

Weight (kg)

Table 2. How we generated CI

Quantified SelfDIS 2017, June 10–14, 2017, Edinburgh, UK641FINDINGS
We  determined  that  Weight  CI  was  imperative  for  dieters; 
one participant who was not given CI messages during the 
first two weeks tried to calculate his CI from PI: (P1, week 3; 
CI  not  provided)  “Every  day,  my  caloric  intake  is  400 
calories  less  than  caloric  burn,  and  if  I  assume  only 
carbohydrates burn, I’m supposed to lose 100 g. That will be 
3 kg in a month. I don’t think that’s accurate, but I think I 
will lose at least 1 kg.”

In  the  following  section,  we  present  findings  from  the 
interview analysis regarding how Weight CI, Rate CI, and PI
were utilized during self-management of health behavior.

Weight CI Makes Participants Imagine the Future Self
Motivational  impact  of  Weight  CI  originated  from  the 
participants’ imagination of their future selves. Since Weight 
CI directly shows the weight (kg), participants were able to 
easily  create  their  future  self-images  when  Weight  CI  was 
given.  Since  participants  did  not  have  to  translate  or  re-
calculate given information, participants were able to acquire 
their future self-images in a concrete manner compared with 
when  they  had  to  estimate  how  their  body  would  change 
based on information other than Weight CI. This imagination 
led participants to be more confident in their ability to lose 
weight and resulted in increased motivation. This finding is 
consistent  with  previous  research  findings,  which  indicate 
that  people  who  explicitly  imagine  the  future  are  more 
confident  that  the  future  event  will  occur  and  tend  to  do 
things that can catalyze it compared with people who do not 
explicitly  imagine  the  future  [1,  30]:  (P6,  week  4;  CI 
provided:  commenting  on  Weight  CI)  “This  week’s  alarm 
was much more helpful than the one from week 3 (CI was not 
provided). When I step on the scales, I see kg, not calories. 
[…] I can picture detailed images and I feel more likely that 
I  will  really  lose  weight.  I  also  thought  I  should  work  out 
more, and become more determined.”

Accordingly, some of the participants mentioned that having 
their  weight  forecast  too  far  into  the  future  may  not  be 
desirable  because  of  the  many  possible  variables  that  can 
influence events during that time. Those variables disrupt the 
clear  envisioning  of  future  self-images:  (P9,  week  3;  CI 
provided:  commenting  on  Weight  CI)  “I’m  not  certain  of 
what  will  happen  in  two  months.  Thus,  I  think  predicting 
[weight]  a  month  later  [but  not  two  months]  is  most 
appropriate since I can plan my schedule and imagine that I 
will lose some weight if I continue what I’ve done last week.”

Weight CI Reminds Participants of Their Ultimate Goal
In  addition,  because  Weight  CI  represents  information 
related  to  the  dieters’  ultimate  goals,  it  naturally  evoked 
participants’  thoughts  about  their  ultimate  goals.  What  P6 
conceived  in  the  aforementioned  quote  corresponds  to  the 
ultimate goal (to lose weight) rather than a means to an end 
(to  restrict  calorie  intake).  After  receiving  Weight  CI, 
participants  tried  to  imagine  their  changed  body,  which 
spontaneously  sparked  recall  of  their  ultimate  goals. 
Remembering one’s goal is important as a starting point in 

the cognitive process of behavior change; “Thinking begins 
with goals and cannot move without them” [31, p. 19].

Therefore, participants also wanted to be able to personalize 
the forecast date based on their goal dates. In this case, it was 
reasonable  to  forecast  weight  after  a  month  because  at  the 
beginning of the study we asked participants to set a weight-
loss goal for a month later. Likewise, participants wanted to 
be able to get specific forecasts targeting a specific goal date 
they  had  in  mind:  (P4,  wrap-up  interview: commenting  on 
Weight  CI)  “The  weight  forecast  should  tell  me  my  future 
weight on my goal date, not on some arbitrary date such as 
three months from the start. Let’s say I’m on a diet for my 
wedding.  I’m  going  to  be  interested  in  my  weight  on  my 
wedding day, not other days!”

Accordingly,  participants  wanted  CI  to  predict  something 
related  to  their  ultimate  goal,  not  necessarily  limited  to 
weight  (kg)  information.  Although  the  ultimate  goal  of  all 
the participants was to lose weight, they approached it from 
different  aspects:  some  wanted  to  reduce  body  fat,  while 
others aimed to fit into smaller jeans. Participants perceived 
that  CI  directly  refers  to  their  ultimate  goal  to  be  more 
intuitive: (P8, week 3; CI provided: commenting on Weight 
CI) “The weight forecast was useful, but it may also be good 
to forecast my clothing size. […] Saying ‘you will be able to 
fit into your size 24 jeans!’ will make me say ‘wow!’ and I 
will diet even harder.”

The  Use  of  Weight  CI  Depends  on  the  Individual’s 
Ultimate Goal
The impact of Weight CI on participants’ experience differed 
according  to  their  ultimate  goals.  Weight  CI  was  more 
important  for  participants  who  wanted  to  lose  weight  than 
participants who wanted to maintain their current weight. In 
the follow-up interviews, some participants' diet goal was not 
to reduce but to maintain current weight. In this case, Weight 
CI was not as influential as it was during the diet program. 
Since they were not expecting a change in the value, to step 
on a scale every day and confirm that their weight was within 
the  acceptable  range  was  an  easier  way  to  manage  their 
weight. If a person’s goal is to “maintain" a certain value, CI 
is  not  the  best  form  to  present  this  value:  (P1,  follow-up
interview:  commenting  on  Weight  CI)  “Now  my  goal  is  to 
maintain  this weight, not  losing or gaining  too much.  […] 
There is a scale at the gym, and it shows my weight if I step 
on it. […] So, information that I will be xx kg in the future is 
not really relevant to me. I can check my weight right now, 
so there is no need to know my weight a week later.”

P6 wanted to incorporate Weight CI in her daily life, even 
when she is not on a diet to ensure that she is alerted before 
she gains weight. She regarded weight as a simple indicator 
to keep an eye on her health. Thus, after she stopped using 
the  FutureSelf  app,  she  tried  to  use  her  knowledge  from 
Weight  CI  to calculate  her Weight  CI  each  day. However, 
since her weight changed, she could not use this knowledge 
anymore. Therefore, she wanted Weight CI to act as an alarm 
clock to warn her that she needed to be careful: (P6, follow-

Quantified SelfDIS 2017, June 10–14, 2017, Edinburgh, UK642up: commenting on Weight CI) “I want FutureSelf to exist in 
my usual life, not only for a diet but for checking my health 
condition before it actually goes bad. Like an alarm clock. If 
I skip exercise or sleep less, then I have to change my lifestyle, 
and  FutureSelf  can  predict  the  consequences  of  that  and 
alert me to control my habits.”

When  the  participants’  ultimate  goal  is  to  lose  weight, 
Weight  CI  predictions  that  are  closer  to  the  goal  weight 
tended to boost their confidence. Weight CI close to the goal 
weight convinced participants that they would lose weight as 
long as they continued the same behavior, which motivated 
them to meet their sub-goals. This is in accord with Locke’s 
description: people’s commitments to goals increase with the 
belief  that  those  goals  are  attainable  [19]: (P1,  week  4; CI 
provided: commenting on Weight CI) “The forecast said 77 
kg and I thought I could reach that goal. Just 1 kg more to 
go.  It  was  too  vague  at  first,  but  after  I  got  the  messages 
[containing Weight CI] in Week 4, I became confident. All I 
had to do was just to keep going.”

However, Rate CI Is Not Construed as a Prediction
Participants discovered that Rate CI was less easy to imagine 
in the future perspective. After receiving Rate CI at 15:00, 
some  participants  divided  the  number  in  half  and  tried  to 
construe it as an “achievement rate so far”. Other participants 
perceived  that  they  had  done  120%  of  the  activity  amount 
that should be done by 15:00 when their Rate CI value was 
120%. This representation of achievement rate can hardly be 
regarded  as  a  prediction  for  the  future:  (P8,  week  2;  CI 
provided:  commenting  on  Rate  CI)  “But,  when  I  tried  to 
understand the achievement rate prediction, if it said 80%, I 
divided it in half and thought I did about 40% so far. But I 
don’t know why I did so. It doesn’t make sense.”

Goal achievement rate information (%) was preferred to kcal 
information  since  percent  value  has  a  standard  to  be 
compared. However, no participant wanted this information 
to be presented in the future perspective; they all wanted to 
know  “what  percentage  of  the  goal  they  have  achieved  so 
far”.  This  observation  demonstrates 
the  goal 
achievement rate indicated by Rate CI is consumed not in the 
future  perspective  but  in  the  present  perspective.  The  goal 
achievement rate represents the activity amount, and thus it 
is utilized while making a decision on how much more/less 
to do a certain activity. Therefore, when participants received 
Rate CI, they had to somehow translate it into “achievement 
rate so far” to use the information to plan their activities.

that 

Weight CI and PI Collaborate with Each Other
Weight CI motivated the participants, but it did not provide 
enough information to plan detailed strategies to meet their 
goals; it did not indicate how much more to exercise or how 
many  calories 
intake. Thus,  participants  needed 
information  regarding  “activity”  to  organize  a  weight-loss 
plan and set sub-goals to hit the ultimate goal. For example, 
one  day,  P3  received  Weight  CI  predicting  that  he  would 
meet his weight-loss goal, and he tried to repeat that day’s 
activity. However, he could not acquire enough information 

to 

from  CI,  so  he  checked  Fitbit  to  find  more  detailed 
information  to  plan  his  strategy,  how  he  should  behave  to 
lose  weight.  The  information  he  found  in  Fitbit  can  be 
regarded as PI: (P3, week 4; CI provided) “My goal for this 
week was to eat the same as on Monday and Tuesday. On 
Monday  and  Tuesday,  I  received  a  forecast  saying  that  I 
would be 74 kg. So I thought I was doing well. I checked the 
data on those days on Fitbit and set them as a standard.”

We observed two types of collaboration between Weight CI 
and PI. First, as you can see from the example above, Weight 
CI  served  as  a  criterion  that  helped  people  evaluate  their 
current  performance.  This  is  beneficial  because  taking  a 
subjective  view  of  health-related  symptoms  is  risky  and 
easily biased [27]. People may notice their obesity only after 
they have already become obese, without having a chance to 
prevent it. Thus, it is important to be vigilant to health-related 
symptoms  and  to  take  an objective  view  of  them. Using 
Weight CI as an objective criterion, participants reinterpreted 
PI to set a sub-goal; this phenomenon was observed in every 
case, whether the predicted weight was higher or lower than 
the participants’ goal weight:

(P9, week 3; CI provided: commenting on Weight CI) “One 
day I ate so little and my forecast said 60 kg. I thought that 
was too small, so I planned to eat more.”

(P2, week 4; CI provided: commenting on Weight CI) “It was 
shocking.  I am  participating  in  a  one-month  diet  program 
and I am hardly losing any weight. I thought I ate a bit much 
that day and decided to change my diet the next day.”

Second, PI acted as evidence of CI. Providing both PI and CI 
together helped P8 imagine how CI was calculated; therefore, 
CI  seemed  more  plausible  and  credible.  This  perception  is 
important  because it  is  difficult  to  trust  questionable  data, 
and  distrust  may  decrease  the  impact  of  data  on  behavior 
change [13]: (P8, wrap-up: commenting on CI) “Starting a 
report with a fact is very convincing. Saying ‘You did this, 
and  you  did  that  [PI]’  before  telling  me  the  important 
information [CI] was like an introduction.”

they 

intake  or  consumption  as 

Consequently,  through  gradual  learning,  participants  were
able to discover whether they would gain or lose weight from 
a  certain  behavior.  Participants  who  were  initially  clueless 
about  caloric  information  became  able  to  estimate  their 
caloric 
repeatedly 
synchronized and checked the Fitbit app. Additionally, they 
began to compare the difference between their caloric intake 
and  their  consumption  each  day  with  the  Weight CI 
predictions to calculate how large the difference should be to 
achieve their goal weight. As a result, participants learned to 
judge whether they were losing or gaining weight: (P9, week 
4:  commenting  on  Weight  CI  received  in  week  3)  “Now  I 
have my own way of estimating calories while eating. It’s like, 
‘I feel like I’m going to get fat because I ate this much,’ or, 
‘eating this much is okay.’ It’s embodied cognition.”

Quantified SelfDIS 2017, June 10–14, 2017, Edinburgh, UK643Tolerance for Imperfect Prediction of Weight CI
Participants’  attitude  toward  the  prediction  accuracy  of  CI 
differed  greatly  depending  on  the  type  of  CI.  When 
participants were  asked  in  the  follow-up  interviews  if  they 
would use the FutureSelf service again, most of them did not 
want  to  receive  Rate  CI  since  it  includes  an  irrational 
assumption:  people  do  not  repeat  their  daily  experiences. 
Although this assumption is also made in the prediction of 
Weight  CI,  all  participants  indicated  in  the  follow-up 
interviews that they wanted to receive Weight CI.

Three participants  mentioned  that  they  distrusted  Rate  CI 
because  the  prediction  assumes  that  they  will  repeat  their 
experiences  at  the  same  rate  in  the  future,  which  is  not 
guaranteed. Because  goal  achievement  rate  information  is 
employed in the present perspective, the prediction of Rate 
CI,  which  inevitably  entails  reducing  the  credibility  of 
information, was not necessary. Even if prediction accuracy 
was  increased  by  adopting  a  personalized  prediction 
the 
algorithm with  machine-learning 
participants  continued  to reject  Rate  CI:  (P1,  follow-up: 
commenting  on  Rate  CI) “I  think  I  am  not  going  to  use  it 
[Rate CI] even if it adopts deep learning. Prediction quality 
may become better than before, but I don’t think my lifestyle 
is that predictable.”

technology, 

Five  participants  questioned  the  prediction  algorithm  of 
Weight CI; in this case, however, they gained confidence and 
motivation. For instance, P5 became so skeptical that he tried 
to find the calculation algorithm, but was unable to find the 
right answer. Although he remained doubtful, he continued 
to be impacted by Weight CI: he believed that he could lose 
weight when he saw the Weight CI. This phenomenon was 
shared by another participant, P3, who regularly (3 times per 
week)  weighed  himself.  He  said  that  the  gap  between 
measured  weight
(76  kg,  measured  on  Monday) and 
predicted weight (74.4 kg, his Saturday forecast, received on 
Monday) was so large that he could not trust the forecast, but 
he still gained hope and confidence from it.

As  these  two  examples  show,  participants  tended  to 
understand the technical limitations of the weight forecast. 
To benefit from the positive impact of Weight CI, they were 
willing to tolerate some inaccuracy: the participants wanted 
to  feel  hopeful  and  maintain  a  positive  attitude rather  than 
focus on exact numbers. However, they still wanted CI to be 
more  credible.  Thus,  we  consider  that  the  participants 
tolerated  inaccuracy  as  compensation  for  positive  impacts 
rather  than  preferring  low  accuracy.  In  particular,  P6 
described this feature of forecast as a “fortune teller:” (P6, 
week 4; CI provided: commenting on Weight CI) “Predicting 
my weight was amazing but not that credible. It was like a 
fortune teller. […] But my future self-image changed along 
with kg. Last week [CI was not provided], I thought I would 
‘probably’ lose weight. But this week [CI was provided], I 
could really imagine my future image specifically.”

DESIGN IMPLICATIONS AND DISCUSSION
Based  on  these  findings,  we  discuss  several  points  that 
designers should consider when producing and delivering CI 
in self-tracking services.

What Type of Information Should CI Indicate to Stimulate 
Future Envisioning? 
When people receive CI that illustrates activity amount data, 
such  as  Rate  CI,  they  have  difficulty  imagining  what  CI 
actually  means  in  the  future  perspective  because  activity 
amount data are consumed in the present perspective: first, 
to analyze what they have done so far, and second, to plan 
detailed  strategies  to satisfy sub-goals (e.g.,  how  to satisfy 
the  daily  goal  before  the  end  of  the  day).  Thus,  if  activity 
amount data are presented in the future perspective, as in CI, 
people  have  to  reinterpret  the  future  perspective  in  the 
present perspective. Since this reinterpretation process may 
confuse  users,  we  should  avoid  presenting  activity  amount 
data as CI.

By  contrast,  when  people  receive  CI  that  illustrates  status 
change data, such as Weight CI, they can easily imagine their 
future  body  state.  Because  this  type  of  CI  helps  people 
delineate  the  future  self-image  more  explicitly,  people 
become more confident and more inclined to meet their goals 
[1, 30]. Consequently, they begin to believe that their goal is 
attainable, strengthen their self-efficacy, and gain motivation. 
These changes in a user’s attitude are difficult to achieve but 
are  required  to  produce  sustainable  behavior  change,  as 
previous research findings illustrate [22]. 

Therefore,  we  should  design  CI  to  indicate  status  change 
data rather than activity amount data to help users change 
their attitudes and maintain changes in their behavior. As an 
example,  if  a  user’s  workout  goal  is  to  increase  muscle, 
workout  hours  could  be  used  as  an  example  of  activity 
amount data, and muscle mass could be used as an example 
of  status  change  data.  If  we  present  workout  hours  in  the 
form of CI, it will be “if you continue your workouts, you
will  have  worked  out  for  100  hours  in  one  month”.  Users 
cannot intuitively understand what this sentence means, and 
since it is not construed in the future perspective, there is no 
impact as CI. However, if we illustrate muscle mass in the 
form of CI, it will be “your muscle mass will be 40 kg in a 
month.” This  CI  causes  users  to  conjecture  their  changed 
future  self-images  and  subsequently  gain  hope  and
confidence.

The  same  data  can  be  transformed  into  various  types  of 
information, resulting in various types of CI. Some types of 
data become more negative when presented as CI, whereas 
other  types  of  data  can  produce  new  positive  impacts  that 
were not observed when the data were not presented as CI. 
These impacts align with previous research findings, which 
indicate that the form in which data are presented is crucial 
in behavior changes since it impacts how users understand 
the  data  [25].  Recently,  S  Health  by  Samsung  provided 
estimated  active  minute 
to  users,  which 
corresponds to Rate CI. Although providing a novel type of 

information 

Quantified SelfDIS 2017, June 10–14, 2017, Edinburgh, UK644information  is  a  good  attempt,  this  information  would  not 
have  been  construed  in  the  future  perspective.  Thus, 
designers  should  carefully  select  the  type  of  information 
presented in CI.

How Can We Design a CI System to Better Assist Users 
in Recalling Their Ultimate Goals?
CI with  forecast  content,  which  directly  refers  to  users’ 
ultimate  goals,  intuitively  sparked  recall  of  their  ultimate 
goals.  This  finding  is  important  in  behavior  changes  since 
reminding  people  about  a  goal  can  motivate  people  [17]. 
Conversely,  when  people  receive  CI  that  does  not  directly 
correspond  to  their  ultimate  goals,  they  are  forced  to 
reinterpret  the  information  to  compare  their  ultimate  goals 
with  the  provided  forecast. Therefore,  designers  should 
carefully select forecast content of CI that is related to users’ 
ultimate goals. Many types of status change data, from which 
we should choose data that represent users’ ultimate goals, 
are possible.

the 

in  CI  should  be 
time  represented 
Content  and 
personalized  based  on  users’  goal  dates.  Although  the  app 
can be designed to predict CI for any future date, people with 
a  specific  goal  date  are  particularly  stimulated  by  CI  that 
targets  this  date.  Thus,  we  recommend  designing  CI  to 
forecast the future regarding the fixed goal date. In this way, 
people can better observe their progress toward the specific 
goal date. Furthermore, if we do not provide CI prediction 
for the user’s goal date, the user may have to reinterpret the 
given  CI  to  guess  the  CI  on  the  goal  date,  which  is  an 
unnecessary and inaccurate process.

However, if the goal of a user is too distant, she or he may 
have difficulty conjecture the future self-image even though 
the  prediction  is  personalized  to  the  user’s  ultimate  goal.
Since  the  motivational  impact  of  CI  is  attributable  to  the 
imagination of future selves, the time represented in the CI 
should be in the foreseeable future. People often had stable 
schedules  within  a  one-month  period,  but  there  were  too 
many  variables  over  a  two-month  period.  They  found  it 
easier to imagine a future only one month away and therefore 
preferred one-month forecasts to two-month forecasts. The 
ideal  prediction  timeframe  can  differ  from  individual  to 
individual; however, the bottom line is that CI should predict 
an imaginable future that is not too far away.

To  bolster  motivational  impacts  of  CI,  we  can  design  a 
system to help users divide a distant goal into several short-
term goals. If a user’s goal date is too distant to imagine, the 
system  can  break  down  the  distant  goal  into  several  time 
points. For example, if the goal date is one year from now, 
we  can  split  one  year  into  twelve  individual  months  and 
assign twelve monthly goals that the user should achieve to 
satisfy the goal. In this case, the inclusion of CI prediction 
both on the original goal date and the newly formulated goal 
date is recommended because the imagination of the future 
self on the goal date is still needed.

However, we need a different approach for users whose goal 
is  to  maintain  their  current  statuses  rather  than  to  make  a 
behavior change. For these users, CI is not the best method 
for making them imagine their future selves and reminding 
about  ultimate  goals.  In  this  case,  CI  can  be  designed  to 
notify  users  of  seemingly  benign  symptoms  that  they 
neglected.  Specifically,  CI  can  act  as  objective  criteria  to 
alert  users  that  they  have  to  be  careful  by  amplifying  the 
consequence of a small change that users would have ignored.
This action may enable CI to be used even when no specific 
goals are established.

How Can We Create an Actionable CI System?
To make CI actionable, we need to consider not only CI but 
also  the  whole  system  delivering  CI.  To be  specific,  we 
should provide PI that shows the raw data for the prediction 
along with CI in the system. Specifying the PI used to predict 
CI  has  two  consequences.  First,  an  environment  in  which 
both CI and PI exist creates a synergistic effect of CI and PI: 
CI is utilized as a reminder of ultimate goals, and the PI is 
utilized in setting sub-goals. Second, PI acts as evidence of 
CI, making CI more credible.

Create a Synergistic Effect of CI and PI
By providing PI that shows base material for CI prediction,
we can inform users about the most important behaviors for 
changing  CI.  PI  indicating  raw  data  for  the  prediction 
corresponds to Factors, which is defined as what influences 
behavior over a long period of time by Li et al. [18]. Li et al. 
expounded  on  the  importance  of  knowing  factors  since  it 
allows people to assess those factors to change their behavior. 
Thus, providing PI that illustrates Factors of CI helps users 
understand what behavior they have to control.

In this way, we can design PI to be useful in setting sub-goals 
and planning detailed strategies. In addition, well-designed 
CI can support motivation and remind users of their ultimate 
goals. Consequently, we can create an environment in which 
CI  and  PI  collaborate  to  create  a  synergy  effect.  Since  a 
person that is motivated by CI will check their PI, we can use 
CI as a trigger to promote PI exploration. This environment 
can be interpreted using Fogg’s model [14]. Fogg explains 
that while people must have both enough motivation and the 
ability to perform a specific behavior, they need a trigger to 
spark a behavioral change. When both CI and PI are provided, 
CI will increase motivation and PI will provide information 
to help people find out what they need to do to reach their 
goal, increasing their ability. While analyzing PI, CI may act 
as  an  objective  criterion  for  evaluating  performance  and 
planning strategies. Additionally, CI can act as a spark as a 
trigger, to motivate people by eliciting hope and fear. Hence, 
CI designed to motivate people and PI designed to be easily 
exploited for sub-goal setting will create a persuasive service 
environment.

Current  research  on  self-tracking  services  focuses  on  how 
people engage with their sub-goals but is less concerned with 
their ultimate goals [18, 29]. We surmise that the reason for 
this focus is that the information provided by the current self-

Quantified SelfDIS 2017, June 10–14, 2017, Edinburgh, UK645tracking services is primarily composed of PI. However, if 
we adopt both PI and CI in self-tracking services, we will be 
able  to  impact  not  only  people’s  sub-goals  but  also  their 
ultimate goals.

rather than a weight loss. In changing health behavior, both 
positive and negative feedback have different impacts [12]. 
Thus,  the  question  remains  whether  we  should  provide  CI 
when the forecast is negative.

Increase the Credibility of CI
Since questionable information may reduce the impact of this 
information on behavior changes, the information should be 
designed to be defensible [13]. This is particularly important 
in producing CI because CI may arouse user’s questions on 
how it is predicted, which may result in low credibility of the 
information. One certain way to produce believable CI is to
improve the quality of prediction by increasing the prediction 
accuracy, such as by developing a better weight-loss model 
or  personalizing  the  prediction algorithm.  Although  these 
solutions  require  additional  studies,  we  can  make  CI  more 
credible  by  designing  the  presentation  of  CI  to  users  to 
include the base materials employed for predicting CI.

By  simultaneously  providing  both  CI  and PI,  we  can 
adumbrate  how  CI  was  predicted.  PI  that  illustrates  raw 
material  for  CI  prediction  serves  as  evidence  of  CI  and 
enables  users  to  assume  the  prediction  algorithm.  This 
finding  makes  the  black-box  prediction  system  more 
guessable and consequently increasing the credibility of CI 
to  some  degree.  This  adumbration  is  also  important  since 
users  can  be  motivated  to  adopt  misguided  workarounds 
when  the  calculation  algorithm  is  unclear  [36].  Thus, CI 
should  be  accompanied  by  sufficient  explanation to help 
users unveil the CI prediction process.

CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This  paper  proposed the  concept  of  predicting  the  future 
weight of a dieter. By exploring how people experience and 
interact  with these  predictive  information,  we  presented 
design considerations that can practically help designers use 
this  information  in  their self-tracking  service  design.
Findings  from  the  4-week  study  and  follow-up  interviews
revealed that the forecasts of users’ future weight based on 
their  current  behavior  had  unique 
it  made 
participants  imagine  their  future  selves,  reminded  them  of 
their  ultimate  goals,  gave  them  hope  that  they  could  reach 
their goals, and motivated them to be more conscientious in 
making that future come true. Based on these findings, we 
suggested design  implications  to bolster  these  impacts: the 
consequences should represent status change data rather than 
activity  amount  data  and  refer to  an  individual’s  ultimate 
goal. We hope this research will be a step toward the next 
generation  of  self-tracked  information representations that 
will change people’s attitude toward their health behavior.

impacts:

there  are  still  unsolved  questions  around 
However, 
generating CI. In this study, all participants received reduced 
future  weights  because  the  participants  were  actively 
engaged in a diet program. This result may simply show that 
CI was successful in keeping the participants working hard 
to reduce their weight. However, it also means this study had 
no chance of discovering how people would have behaved if 
they received a negative forecast that predicted a weight gain 

In addition, the selection criteria imposed on the participant
recruitment may have affected the results. First, we observed 
the motivational impact of CI, but it is unclear whether the 
participants had previous  issues  related  to motivation.
Second, participants may have already had a fairly positive 
self-image because their weight loss goals were not too bold. 
This modest goal also indicates that participants do not need 
to guess a self-image that is very different from the current 
image. Thus, the process of imagining their future self could 
have been quite pleasurable and easy. Thus, future iteration 
of this study with different group of people will be necessary.

Furthermore,  CI  may  have  different  impacts  on  different 
individuals due to individual differences in susceptibility to 
the  consideration  of  future  consequences.  People  differ  in 
their  degree  of  sensitivity  to  distant  behavioral  outcomes. 
Strathman et al. assessed this as the Consideration of Future 
Consequence (CFC) Scale [32]. An individual’s tendency to 
value  the  immediate  or  distant  outcomes  of  behaviors  can 
interfere  with  the  use  of  CI  [23].  Thus,  we  still  have  to 
investigate whether CI is beneficial across the CFC Scale.

There is also the question of how the impact of CI will differ 
when  users  do  not  have  a  specific  goal.  Most  people  who 
adopt self-tracking services to become healthy have specific 
health-related  goals  [8].  However,  the  system  can  also  be 
employed as a tool for preventive healthcare, as one of the 
participants commented. In this case, we need to investigate 
differences  in  how  CI  influences  users  and,  consequently, 
how it should be designed when users do not have specific 
goals because the production of CI was strongly related to 
users’  ultimate  goals.  Thus,  our  future  research  will 
investigate how CI influences users without specific health-
related goals.

We  glimpsed  opportunities  to  provide  CI  using  more 
concrete methods or metaphors but the design of CI requires 
careful consideration since the manner in which we present 
CI may influence its impact. Previous research suggests an 
avatar as an effective method for communicating risk [24]. 
Visual representation enables users to communicate with the 
information  in  a concrete  manner.  Therefore,  CI  could  be 
delivered  in  various  forms  such  as  avatars,  caricatures  or 
realistic  images. However,  we could  not  conclude whether 
providing  more  detailed  descriptions  of  CI  in  the  form  of 
images  and  avatars  is  superior  to  providing  weight  values 
and  maintaining  the  imagination  gap.  Such  presentation 
techniques warrant further study.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We  thank  all  the  participants  of  the  study for  their  active 
engagement  in  every  task. This  research  was  supported by 
“High  Risk  High  Return  Project”  Funded  by  KAIST 
(N10150037).

Quantified SelfDIS 2017, June 10–14, 2017, Edinburgh, UK646REFERENCES
1. Craig A. Anderson. 1983. Imagination and expectation: 
the effect of imagining behavioral scripts on personal 
influences. J Personal Soc Psychol 45, 2: 293-305.

2.

James T. Austin, Jeffrey B. Vancouver. 1996. Goal 
constructs in psychology: structure, process, and 
content. Psychol Bull 120, 3: 338-375.

3. Albert Bandura. 1990. Self-regulation of motivation 

through anticipatory and self-reactive mechanisms. In 
Perspectives on Motivation: Nebraska Symposium on 
Motivation 38: 69-164.

4. Frank Bentley, Konrad Tollmar. 2013. The power of 
mobile notifications to increase wellbeing logging 
behavior. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '13), 
1095-1098. DOI: 10.1145/2470654.2466140

5. Frank Bentley, Konrad Tollmar, Peter Stephenson, 

Laura Levy, Brian Jones, Scott Robertson, Price, 
Richard Catrambone, Jeff Wilson. 2013. Health 
mashups: presenting statistical patterns between 
wellbeing data and context in natural language to 
promote behavior change. ACM. Trans Comput-Hum 
Interact 20, 5: 30.

6. Gordon D. Brown and Nick Chater. 2001. The 

chronological organization of memory: common 
psychological foundations for remembering and 
timing. In Time and Memory: Issues in Philosophy and 
Psychology. Christoph Hoerl and Teresa McCormack 
(eds.). Clarendon Press, Oxford. 77-110.

7. Nancy Cantor, Hazel Markus, Paula Niedenthal, Paula 

Nurius. 1986. On motivation and the self-concept. In 
Handbook of Motivation and Cognition: Foundations 
of Social Behaviour. Guilford, New York, NY, 96-121.

8. Eun Kyoung Choe, Nicole B Lee, Bongshin Lee, 

Wanda Pratt, Julie A Kientz. 2014. Understanding 
quantified-selfers' practices in collecting and exploring 
personal data. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing (CHI 
'14), 1143-1152. DOI: 10.1145/2556288.2557372

9. Charles Dickens. 1843  Christmas Carol. Chapman & 

Hall, Boca Raton, FL.

10. Pamela A. Dyson. 2010. The therapeutics of lifestyle 
management on obesity. Diabetes Obes Metab 12, 11:
941–946.

11. Andrew Elliot, Mandy M. Shell, Kelly Bouas Henry, 

Markus A. Maier. 2005. Achievement goals, 
performance contingencies, and performance 
attainment: an experimental test. J Educ Psychol 97, 4:
630-640.

12. Ayelet Fishbach, Tal Eyal, Stacey R. Finkelstein. 2010. 
How positive and negative feedback motivate goal 
pursuit. Soc Personal Psychol Compass 4, 8: 517-530.

13. B. J. Fogg. 2002. Persuasive technology: using 

computers to change what we think and do. Ubiquity 
December: 89-120. DOI: 10.1145/764008.763957 

14. B. J. Fogg. 2009. A behavior model for persu asive 
design. In Proceedings of the 4th International 
Conference on Persuasive Technology (Persuasive '09) 
Article 40, 7 pages. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1541948.1541999.

15. Thomas Fritz, Elaine M Huang, Gail C Murphy, 

Thomas Zimmermann. 2014. Persuasive technology in 
the real world: a study of long-term use of activity 
sensing devices for fitness In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '14), 487-496. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2556288.2557383

16. M. Jetté, K. Sidney, G. Blümchen. 1990. Metabolic 
equivalents (METS) in exercise testing, exercise 
prescription, and evaluation of functional capacity. 
Clin Cardiol 13, 8: 555-565.

17. Rachel Karniol, Michael Ross. 1996. The motivational 
impact of temporal focus: thinking about the future and 
the past. Annu Rev Psychol 47, 1: 593-620.

18. Ian Li, Anind Dey, Jodi Forlizzi. 2011. Understanding 
my data, myself: supporting self-reflection with 
ubicomp technologies. In Proceedings of the 
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp '11), 
405-414. DOI: 10.1145/2030112.2030166

19. Edwin A. Locke, Gary P. Latham. 1990. A Theory of 
Goal Setting & Task Performance. Prentice-Hall, Inc., 
Upper Saddle River, NJ.

20. Edwin A. Locke. 1996. Motivation through conscious 

goal setting. Appl Prev Psychol 5, 2: 117-124.

21. Gabriele Oettingen, Doris Mayer. 2002. The 

motivating function of thinking about the future: 
expectations versus fantasies. J Personal Soc Psychol
83, 5: 1198–1212.

22. Harri Oinas-Kukkonen. 2013. A foundation for the 
study of behavior change support systems. Personal 
Ubiquitous Comput. 17, 6 (August 2013), 1223-1235. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00779-012-0591-5

23. Sheina Orbell, Marco Perugini, and Tim Rakow. 2004. 

individual differences in sensitivity to health 
communications: consideration of future consequences. 
Health Psychol 23, 4: 388-396.

24. Perry Parks, Rosanna Cruz, Sun Joo Grace Ahn. 2014. 
Don’t hurt my Avatar: the use and potential of digital 
self-representation in risk communication. International 
Journal Robots, Education and Art 4, 2: 10.

25. Bernd Ploderer, Wolfgang Reitberger, Harri Oinas-
Kukkonen, and Julia Gemert-Pijnen. 2014. Social 
interaction and reflection for behaviour 
change. Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 18, 7 (October 

Quantified SelfDIS 2017, June 10–14, 2017, Edinburgh, UK64732. Alan Strathman, Faith Gleicher, David S. Boninger, C. 
Scott Edwards. 1994. The consideration of future 
consequences: weighing immediate and distant 
outcomes of behavior. J Personal Soc Psychol 66, 4:
742-752.

33. The Korean Society for the Study of Obesity. 2012. 

Guidelines for Managing Overweight and Obesity.
KOSSO, Selangor, Malaysia.

34. Diana M. Thomas, Dale A. Schoeller, Leanne A. 

Redman, Corby K. Martin, James A. Levine, Steven B. 
Heymsfield. 2010. A computational model to 
determine energy intake during weight loss. Am J Clin 
Nutr 92, 6: 1326-1331.

35. Noelia A. Vasquez, Roger Buehler. 2007. Seeing future 

success: does imagery perspective influence 
achievement motivation? Personal Soc Psychol 
Bull 33, 10: 1392-1405.

36. Rayoung Yang, Eunice Shin, Mark W. Newman, Mark 
S. Ackerman. 2015. When fitness trackers don’t ‘Fit’: 
end-user difficulties in the assessment of personal 
tracking device accuracy. In Proceedings of the 
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing
(UbiComp '15), 623-634.

2014), 1667-1676. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00779-
014-0779-y

26. James O Proschaska. 2013. Transtheoretical model of 
behavior change. In Encyclopedia of Behavioral 
Medicine. Springer Verlag, New York, NY, 1997-
2000.

27. Rebecca M. Puhl,Corinne A. Moss-Racusin, Marlene 
B. Schwartz, Kelly D. Brownell. 2008. Weight 
stigmatization and bias reduction: perspectives of 
overweight and obese adults. Health Educ Res 23, 2:
347-358.

28. Yvonne Rogers. 2009. The changing face of human-
computer interaction in the age of ubiquitous 
computing. In HCI and Usability for e-Inclusion. 
Andreas Holzinger, Klaus Miesenberger (eds.). 
Springer Verlag, Berlin, 1–19.

29. John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, 

Matthew Chalmers Chalmers. 2014. Personal tracking 
as lived informatics. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI '14), 1163-1172. 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2556288.2557039.

30. Steven J. Sherman, Richard B. Skov, Esther F. Hervitz, 

Caryl B. Stock. 1981. The effects of explaining 
hypothetical future events: from possibility to 
probability to actuality and beyond. J Exp Soc Psychol
17, 2: 142-158.

31. Herbert A. Simon. 1994. The bottleneck of attention: 
connecting thought with motivation. Nebr Symp Motiv
41: 1-21.

Quantified SelfDIS 2017, June 10–14, 2017, Edinburgh, UK648