How Information Sharing about Care Recipients by Family 
Caregivers Impacts Family Communication 
Naomi Yamashita1, Hideaki Kuzuoka2, Takashi Kudo3, Keiji Hirata4,                                             

Eiji Aramaki5, Kazuki Hattori2 

1 NTT 
Communication 
Science Labs. 

2 University of 
Tsukuba. 

3 Osaka 
University 
Department of 
Psychiatry. 

4 Future 
University 
Hakodate. 

5 Nara Institute of 
Science and 
Technology. 

ABSTRACT 
Previous  research  has  shown  that  tracking  technologies 
have  the  potential  to  help  family  caregivers  optimize  their 
coping  strategies  and  improve  their relationships  with  care 
recipients.  In  this  paper,  we  explore  how  sharing  the 
journals  and  patient’s 
tracked  data  (i.e.,  caregiving 
conditions)  with  other  family  caregivers  affects  home  care 
and  family  communication.  Although  previous  works 
suggested  that  family  caregivers  may  benefit  from  reading 
the  records  of  others,  sharing  patients’  private  information 
might fuel negative feelings of surveillance and violation of 
trust  for  care  recipients.  To  address  this  research  question, 
we  added  a  sharing  feature  to  the  previously  developed 
tracking tool and deployed it for six weeks in the homes of 
15  family  caregivers  who  were  caring  for  a  depressed 
family member. Our findings show how the sharing feature 
attracted  the  attention  of  care  recipients  and  helped  the 
family  caregivers  discuss  sensitive 
issues  with  care 
recipients. 

Author Keywords 
Caregiving; 
family 
communication; healthcare technology; tracking technology 

caregiver;  depression; 

informal 

ACM Classification Keywords 
J.3.  Life  and  Medical  Sciences,  Health,  Medical 
Information Systems 

INTRODUCTION 
Recent  changes  in  the  demographics  is  placing  excessive 
demand  on  the  healthcare  systems,  causing  a  shift  from 
clinician-centered  professional  service  to  informal  home-
centered  care  [12].  Such  changes  are  increasing  societal 
awareness of the importance of informal home care. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components 
of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post 
on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or 
a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montreal, QC, Canada 
© 2018 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed 
to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-5620-6/18/04…$15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173796 

the 

such  circumstances, 

Under 
role  of  computer 
technologies  to  support  informal  care  (including  self-care) 
is becoming increasingly important [12]. For example, self-
tracking  technologies  allow  individuals  to  take  a  proactive 
role in caring for themselves [28,31]. Health-related online 
support groups provide a place for individuals to learn from 
others and receive emotional support [9,13]. While research 
shows  promising  results  suggesting  these  technologies 
compensate  for  the  scarcity  of  professional  care,  most 
design efforts have so far focused on supporting either the 
patient  or  the  caregiver  [5,15,46].  Although  recent  works 
have  emphasized  the  need  to  consider  caregiving  in 
“relational  terms”  [2,18,41],  little  work  has  focused  on 
designing technology that supports the relationship between 
caregivers and care recipients in the context of homecare. 

Our  goal  is  to  design  a  tool  that  helps  family  caregivers 
improve  their  care  and  communication  with  their  care 
recipients at home. We specifically focus on helping family 
caregivers cope better with a depressed family member. We 
are  particularly  interested  in  studying  this  population 
because depressed sufferers typically seclude themselves at 
home  during  depressive  episodes  [1,25],  which  makes 
informal  care  by  family  caregivers  particularly  critical 
[26,27].  Research  associates  patients  who 
receive 
compassionate  care  from  family  caregivers  with  lower 
hospital readmission rates [42].  

To reach our goal, we developed a tracking tool that allows 
family  caregivers  to  record  patient’s  conditions  such  as 
mood  and  behavior  based  on  their  observations  as  well  as 
their  own  caregiving  activities.  The  tracking  tool  helps 
family  caregivers  experiment  and  optimize  their  coping 
strategies  with  care  recipients,  especially  when 
they 
manifest unexpected behaviors, including extreme negative, 
agitated,  or  lethargic  attitudes.  The  tool  was  deployed  for 
six  weeks  in  the  homes  of  14  family  caregivers  who  were 
caring  for  a  depressed  family  member  [51].  The  findings 
showed  that  the  tool  helped  the  family  caregivers  better 
family  members.  Furthermore, 
cope  with  depressed 
although  previous  works  have  warned 
family 
caregivers’ use of tracking technologies to monitor patient’s 
health  may  create  patient-caregiver  conflicts,  this  work’s 
findings  showed  that  family  communication  was  actually 

that 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 222Page 1 
 
improved. This previous study differed from other previous 
works  in  that  family  caregivers  in  [51]  recorded  patient 
conditions  to  promote  their  own  behavioral  changes  while 
family  caregivers  (mostly  parents)  in  previous  works 
monitored  the  health  condition  of  the  patient  (child)  to 
promote the patient’s behavioral changes. 

Building  on 
this  previous  work,  our  current  study 
investigates  whether  (how)  family  caregivers  sharing 
tracked  data  with  other  family  caregivers  affect  the  caring 
and  patient-caregiver  relationships.  A  number  of  health-
tracking apps allow the users to share data with others who 
are  working  on  the  same  health  goals  [3,38,44].  Research 
argues that sharing experience facilitates learning, provides 
emotional  support,  and  bolsters  competition  [7,28,31]. 
Individuals  are  also  more  willing  to  reveal  personal  or 
upsetting  topics  online,  matching  the  needs  of  caregivers 
looking after a depressed family member [4,40]. Our family 
caregivers  may  also  receive  the  same  benefits  by  sharing 
their  data  with  other  family  caregivers.  However,  note  the 
data  shared  by  family  caregivers  are  not  solely  about 
themselves; they also include private information about the 
care  recipients.  Thus,  sharing  such  data  may  fuel  negative 
feelings in care recipients about surveillance or breeches of 
trust.  Put  it  all  together,  it  remains  unclear  how  family 
caregivers’  information  sharing  affects  home  care  and 
patient-caregiver relationships. 

To  answer  this  research  question,  in  the  current  study,  we 
added  a  sharing  feature  to  the  previously  developed 
tracking  tool  and  deployed  it  in  the  homes  of  15  family 
caregivers who participated in [51]. In both studies, family 
caregivers recorded their own caregiving activities and their 
care  recipient’s  behaviors/moods  for  six  weeks.  By 
comparing  their  log  data  before  and  after  introducing  the 
sharing  function,  we  analyzed  how  the  sharing  feature 
affected their tool usage. We also interviewed ten randomly 
selected  family  caregivers  to  ask  about  the  changes  they 
noticed  after  sharing  their  data,  emphasizing  the  patient-
caregiver relationships. Our findings show how information 
sharing  by  family  caregivers  drew  the  attention  of  care 
recipients  and  influenced  family  communication.  The 
findings  will  contribute  to  the  field  of  HCI  by  suggesting 
new  ways  for  using  health-tracking  technologies  and 
information sharing. 

BACKGROUND 

Caregiving for a Depressed Family Member 
Research  shows  that  depression  causes  a  variety  of 
behavioral  changes  in  its  sufferers.  For  example,  the 
reactions  of  depressed  sufferers  tend  to  be  negative, 
lethargic,  and  offensive  [19,34].  Since  sufferers  typically 
withdraw  from  social  activities  and  seclude  themselves  at 
home  during  depressive  episodes  [1,25],  family  caregivers 
who live with depression sufferers are generally exposed to 
these behaviors. 

Family  caregivers  are  often  confused  by  such  behavioral 
changes in depressed sufferers because they tend to deviate 
from  the  sufferer’s  original  personality  [25].  Due  to  the 
large  variance  in  depressive  symptoms,  family  caregivers 
often  have  trouble  assessing  their  causes  and  do  not  know 
how  to  deal  with  them.  Depression’s  recurrent  nature  also 
creates  anxiety  in  family  caregivers  who  worry  about 
triggering  relapses  by  their  own  words/behaviors  [19,24]. 
As  a  result,  many  caregivers  are  confused  about  how  to 
optimally  cope  with  sufferers,  not  knowing  whether  they 
should  criticize  the  sufferers  or  suppress  their  reactions  to 
avoid  exacerbating  depressive  symptoms  when 
they 
experience the extreme behaviors of sufferers [51].  

is  not 

Helping  family  caregivers  develop  coping  skills  to  deal 
trivial. 
with  such  sufferer  attitudes/behaviors 
According  to  Keitner  et  al.  [27],  the  course  of  depressive 
illnesses,  recurrence  rates,  and  the  suicidal  behaviors  of 
depression  sufferers  are  all  affected  by  the  family  and  its 
functioning, indicating the importance of the  informal care 
provided  by  family  caregivers.  Thus,  our  work  supports 
family  caregivers  and  helps  them  optimize  their  coping 
skills  to  improve  their  interaction  with  care  recipients  at 
home. 

Family  Caregivers  and  Tracking  Patient  Health 
Conditions 
Health-tracking  technologies  have  the  potential  to  help 
family  caregivers  develop  and  improve  their  coping  skills 
with  sufferers  of  depression.  While  most  health-tracking 
tools  focus  on  individuals  managing  their  own  health 
[28,31], they possess a number of features that fit the needs 
of  family  caregivers  who  are  looking  after  a  depressed 
family  member.  For  example,  tracking  technologies  help 
users identify the hidden patterns in their life/health that are 
individuals 
often 
[6,31,41].  Since  depression  has  a 
in 
symptoms  and  family  situations,  the  flexibility  of  tracking 
technologies  is  welcomed  for  this  population  [10,33]. 
Furthermore,  tracking  tools  allow  users  to  try  out  new 
experiences  as  part  of  experimentation, 
to 
opportunistic engagement in desired behaviors [8,29]. This 
technologies  may  help  family 
implies 
caregivers 
by 
their 
experimenting with various coping strategies. 

indiscernible  and  different  among 

tracking 
optimize 

large  variance 

strategies 

leading 

coping 

that 

Even  though  many  reasons  exist  to  assert  why  tracking 
technology  might  help  family  caregivers  improve  their 
coping  skills,  family  caregivers  who  monitor  the  health 
condition  of  care  recipients  introduces  new  challenges 
concerning  privacy  issues.  Some  studies  warned  that 
patient-caregiver  conflicts  might  increase  when  family 
caregivers  monitor  patient  conditions  [16,21,47].  In  these 
studies, family caregivers are typically parents who monitor 
the health condition of their child. The parents’ goals are to 
improve  the  health  control  of  their  child  and  train  him/her 
in  self-care.  Toscos  et  al.’s  work  on  children  with  type  I 
technologies  might 
diabetes 

showed  how 

tracking 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 222Page 2exacerbate  parent-child  conflicts,  especially  with  teenagers 
[47].  Although  a  parent  might  just  be  checking  a  child’s 
blood  glucose  level,  which  is  understandable  and  even 
desirable parent behavior for managing their child’s health, 
the  parent’s  perspective  might  clash  with  the  child’s 
perspective,  which  might  place  considerable  value  on  the 
freedom  to  make  his/her  own  health  decisions.  Other 
studies  have  shown  that  parents  with  access  to  their 
children’s  geographical  location  traces  can  cause  family 
tension 
the 
implications  of  collecting  and  sharing  health  information 
within  family  members,  revealed  conflicting  values  of 
family  members  to  information  sharing:  parents  value  the 
openness  of  sharing  information  among  family  members 
while children express privacy concerns [20]. 

[32,36].  Other  work,  which  explored 

In contrast, some studies report that when family caregivers 
track  patient  conditions,  family  communication  increased 
[22,51]. For example, Huber et al. studied the impact of in-
home  monitoring  technologies  on  family  relationships  and 
described  how  they  enhanced  communication  between 
independently-living  older  adults  and 
informal 
caregivers  [22].  [51]  showed  that  family  caregivers  who 
track  patient  condition  (i.e.,  mood  and  behavior)  and  their 
own  caregiving  activities 
improved  patient-caregiver 
relationships. During deployment, asking the care recipients 
about their health conditions became a daily routine for the 
caregivers  when 
tool. 
Interestingly,  contrary  to  Toscos’s  findings  [47],  care 
recipients  in  [51]  seemed  pleased  when  family  caregivers 
asked about their health conditions.  

they  record  with  a 

tracking 

their 

One  factor,  which  may  contribute  to  such  contradictory 
results, is the difference in the goals of caregivers for using 
tracking  technology.  In  the  former  case  that  led  to  tension 
between  patients  and  caregivers,  the  family  caregivers 
monitored  the  health  condition  (or  location)  of  patients  to 
promote  patient’s  behavioral  changes.  In  other  words, 
parents’  ideal  healthy  behavior  of  their  children  often 
deviated from their children’s actual healthy behavior. Such 
mismatched values in them often caused caregiver-recipient 
tension [2]. On the other hand, for the latter case that led to 
increased  and  healthier  family  communication,  family 
caregivers  monitored  the  health  condition  of  their  patients 
for their own sake. For example, Huber et al. reported that a 
tracking  tool  reduced  the  anxiety  of  family  caregivers  by 
allowing them to confirm that their parents were doing fine 
[22].  In  [51],  family  caregivers  used  the  tracking  tool  to 
promote their own behavioral changes: to develop their own 
skills to better cope with depressed family members.  

In  the  current  study,  we  extend  [51]  by  adding  a  sharing 
feature  to  the  tracking  tool  and  examine  whether/how 
caregivers sharing the care recipients’ personal information 
affects 
the  relationship  between  caregivers  and  care 
recipients.  Although  [51]  showed  that  tracking  technology 
helped  family  caregivers  improve  their  coping  skills  and 
family  communication,  they  were  only  allowed  to  track 

data  individually;  they  could  not  share  data  with  other 
family caregivers.  

Social Features of Tracking Tools 
Online support groups allow people to receive  information 
and  social  support  to  cope  with  a  wide  range  of  difficult 
situations [23,50]. For family caregivers who lack the time/ 
energy to attend physical meetings or feel barriers related to 
face management, a dedicated online group may serve as a 
place to ask for guidance and encouragement [41].  

A number of tracking tools leverage the social influence of 
online  support  groups  by  forming  or  linking  to  online 
communities  [3,38,44].  For  example,  UP  Health  allows 
users  to  share  information  about  their  efforts  to  stop 
smoking  and  ask  about  the  smoking  habits  of  others  [44]. 
Such  social  networking  sites  as  PatientsLikeMe  allow 
patients to self-track their health conditions as well as share 
their experiences with patients who are working toward the 
same health goals [3]. Furthermore, social media platforms 
and sites like the Quantified Self website provide places for 
self-trackers who use different tracking tools to share their 
personal data and learn from others [31].  

Research  shows  that  health-tracking  apps  that  leverage 
social  influence  promote  user  engagement  in  desired 
behaviors  to  accomplish  their  health  goals  [7,17,28].  For 
example,  Consolvo  et  al.  examined  the  impact  of  social 
support on self-trackers by comparing two user groups [7]: 
mobile  fitness  journal  groups  with  and  without  a  sharing 
feature. The sharing feature allowed users to see the data of 
others and exchange messages with them. Results revealed 
that  participants  who  used 
the  social  version  were 
significantly more likely to reach their daily step goals than 
participants  whose  version  did  not  support  sharing.  Social 
support  from  others  was  helpful  and  spurred  competition 
that was also often seen as motivational.  

Our study expands Consolvo et al.’s work [7] by examining 
the impact of sharing information among family caregivers. 
Our  study  differs  from  Consolvo’s  study  in  several  ways. 
First,  the  participants  in  our  study  (i.e.,  family  caregivers) 
shared  the  information  of  care  recipients  with  other 
participants. Note that the participants in our study were not 
allowed  to  exchange  messages  among  themselves  (see 
“Design”  for  details).  Finally,  our  work  focused  on  the 
impact  of  a  sharing  feature  on  caregiver-care  recipient 
relationships. 

TRACKING TOOL: FMCT-S 
In the current study, we developed FMCT-S (Family Mood 
and Care Tracker – with Sharing), which is a shared version 
of  FMCT,  that  allows  family  caregivers  to  not  only  track 
patient  condition  and  caregiving  data  but  share  them  with 
other family caregivers. 

Design 
FMCT-S  consists  of  four  sections:  a  user  profile  section, 
recording,  reviewing,  and  timeline  sections.  The  recording 
section  allows  the  family  caregivers  to  record  data.  The 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 222Page 3Figure 1. Reviewing section of FMCT-S (translated 
into English) 

reviewing  section  facilitates  reflective  analysis  of  the  data 
by  visualizing  them  in  a  single  chart.  The  timeline  section 
chronologically  displays  the  caregiving  journals  of  all  the 
family caregivers. 

FMCT-S extends FMCT in a few ways. First, it allows the 
family  caregivers  to  see  the  data  recorded  by  other 
caregivers. Family caregivers can view the reviewing charts 
of other family caregivers (Figure 1) or read the caregiving 
journals  of  others  in  a  timeline  (Figure  2).  We  also  added 
user profiles so that family caregivers can better understand 
the data of other caregivers.  

User Profile (Newly Added for FMCT-S) 
A  user’s  profile  consists  of  his/her  user  name  and  some 
optional information: gender, relationship with patient, and 
social role of self and patient. Family caregivers can decide 
whether to share this information with others.  

Recording Section (Extended from FMCT) 
The  recording  section  allowed  the  family  caregivers  to 
record the patient’s moods (on a scale of 1-10), medications, 
amount  of  sleep,  amount  of  communication,  outdoor 
activities,  bathing/grooming,  meals, 
snacks,  alcohol 
consumption,  their  subjective  burden  of  caregiving  (on  a 
scale  of  1-10),  creating  their  own  caregiving  activities 
(caregiving journals), and any other unexpected events.  

To  minimize  the  input  burden,  most  recording  items 
consisted of multiple-choice questions. For medication, the 
their  care  recipient’s  prescribed 
caregivers  registered 
medicines  and  doses  and  made  alterations  if  there  was  a 
change  in  the  daily  intake.  The  weather  information 
(atmospheric  pressure,  high/low  temperatures,  and  actual 
weather  conditions)  was  automatically  retrieved  from  the 
internet.  

Note  that  the  family  caregivers  rated  the  care  recipients’ 
mood based on their observations. Even though the ratings 
of the family caregivers might be different from the actual 
moods of the care recipients, a previous study with FMCT 
indicated  that  such  subjective  values  remain  useful  for 

Figure 2. Timeline section of FMCT-S (translated 
into English) 
developing  coping  strategies  [51].  The  behaviors  of  care 
recipients  were  also  recorded  based  on  their  observations. 
Family  caregivers  in  [51]  asked  the  care  recipients  about 
their  day  (e.g.,  whether  they  had  lunch  or  went  out  for  a 
walk) when observation was not possible, which seemed to 
please the care recipients. 

Free-form  text  boxes  were  provided  for  recording  their 
caregiving  activities  (caregiving  journals)  and  entering 
details  about  patient’s  outdoor  activities  and  unexpected 
events. For their own caregiving activities, three text boxes 
are  provided  to  prompt  input  for  positive  and  negative 
outcomes of their caregiving activities as well as what was 
learned.  

Extension  from  FMCT:  To  promote  the  development  of 
coping  strategies,  FMCT-S  by  default  allowed 
the 
caregivers to access all the recorded data of other caregivers. 
However, since sharing personal information can also raise 
privacy issues [39], FMCT-S allowed the family caregivers 
to  control  which  information  to  conceal  by  pressing  the 
“private”  button  when  they  wanted  to  keep  information 
private. 

Reviewing Section (Extended from FMCT) 
The  reviewing  section  displayed  a  chart  of  the  family 
caregiver’s  recorded  data  to  facilitate  reflection  on  his/her 
own  caregiving  activities.  All  the  data  recorded  by  the 
caregiver  were  displayed  in  a  single  chart  so  that  he/she 
could explore it in a holistic manner (Figure 1) [30]. In the 
chart,  patient  mood  (red  line)  and  caregiver  burden  (blue 
line)  were  shown  as  graphs,  and  other  patient  data  were 
shown  as  icons.  Caregiving  activities  and  unexpected 
events were shown as pop-ups by clicking on a date.  

Extension  from  FMCT:  In  FMCT-S,  a  pulldown  menu  of 
other  caregivers’  nickname  was  added  so  that  caregivers 
can see any other caregiver’s chart (Figure 1).  

Timeline Section (Newly Added for FMCT-S) 
The  timeline  section  displayed  all  the  family  caregivers’ 
journals  (i.e.,  positive,  negative,  and  lessons  learned)  and 
unexpected events in a chronological order (Figure 2). This 
section  was  automatically  shown  to  the  caregivers  when 
they  logged  into  the  system.  When  a  caregiver  likes  or 
empathizes with someone else’s post, he/she can check the 
post by clicking the empathy button. Note that the empathy 
button is not designed to provide feedback to the author; it 
helps  the  caregiver  quickly  identify  the  posts  he/she  liked 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 222Page 4ID  Sex  Age 

Relative 

F 
1 
F 
2 
F 
3 
F 
4 
F 
5 
F 
6 
F 
7 
F 
8 
9  M 
F 
10 
F 
11 
F 
12 
13  M 
F 
14 
F 
15 

20's 
40's 
30's 
30's 
30's 
40's 
30's 
40's 
50's 
40's 
40's 
20's 
50's 
40's 
50's 

daughter 
wife 
daughter 
sister 
wife 
wife 
wife 
wife 
husband 
wife 
wife 
sister 
father 
wife 
mother 

# chars 
Min-Max (avg.) 
101-523 (265) 
54-293 (124) 
138-1193 (412) 
0-248 (90) 
9-192 (58) 
146-1298 (399) 
305-1986 (817) 
0-210 (55) 
224-1183 (445) 
0-200 (89) 
10-301 (142) 
0-60 (8) 
15-64 (33) 
17-161 (67) 
19-239 (96) 

#acs
_pat 
20 
43 
2 
0 
0 
20 
19 
18 
75 
19 
35 
7 
7 
6 
4 

#acs
_jnl 
148 
107 
129 
44 
53 
383 
216 
85 
245 
45 
150 
31 
47 
71 
66 

Intv.  Work 

T1 

T2 

T3 

T4 

T5 

T6 

x 

x 
x 

x 
x 

x 
x 
x 

x 

x 

FT-out 
FT-hm 
FT-out 
PT 
FT-out 
FT-hm 
FT-out 
FT-out 
FT-out 
FT-hm 
HM 
HM 
FT-hm 
FT-hm 
FT-hm 

9 
-- 
8 
1 
-- 
3 
6 
-- 
2 
5 
2 
-- 
4 
-- 
1 

4 
-- 
1 
7 
-- 
3 
9 
-- 
0 
0 
2 
-- 
0 
-- 
3 

5 
-- 
4 
2 
-- 
0 
8 
-- 
3 
3 
2 
-- 
2 
-- 
1 

0 
-- 
2 
0 
-- 
1 
4 
-- 
3 
4 
1 
-- 
2 
-- 
2 

0 
-- 
3 
1 
-- 
0 
6 
-- 
4 
1 
2 
-- 
0 
-- 
1 

0 
-- 
1 
0 
-- 
2 
6 
-- 
3 
1 
3 
-- 
0 
-- 
1 

Table  1  Participant  demographics  and  prevalence  of  each  theme  (#  chars:  average  number  of  characters  entered,  #  acs  pat: 
number of accesses to other participant’s health records,  # acs jnl: number of accesses to other patients’ caregiving journal, 
Intv:  Interviewed,  FT-hm:  full-time  homemaker, FT-out:  full-time  jobs  outside  the  home,  PT: work  part  time,  HM: work  at 
home. T1-T6 indicates the themes emerged from the interview coding. 

from a pile of them. In other words, caregivers can see their 
own checks, but they cannot see other caregiver’s checks or 
those  they  have  received.  As  the  number  of  check  for  a 
particular  caregiver  increase,  all  the  inputs  from  that 
caregiver  are  highlighted  (i.e.,  background  color  of  his/her 
input gets darker) on the reader’s screen.  

Note  that  FMCT-S  did  not  allow  the  family  caregivers  to 
exchange  messages  with  each  other  like  many other social 
networking  sites.  This  decision  was  made  based  on  the 
feedback  from  family  caregivers  of  the  FMCT  study  [51]: 
When asked about exchanging messages with other family 
caregivers,  many  raised  the  concern  about  the  potential 
burden for answering to other caregivers' comments. Some 
were also concerned about other caregivers giving advice to 
them without fully understanding their family situation. We 
were  also  concerned  that  stronger  bonding  among  family 
caregivers may result in increased complaints about the care 
recipients  which  may  deteriorate  the  caregiver-recipient 
relationships. 

In sum,  FMCT-S provides  family  caregivers the  chance  to 
learn  from  others  by  only  seeing  the  information  of  other 
caregivers.  

identified 

DEPLOYMENT STUDY 
Fifteen  family  caregivers  (12  females  and  3  males,  mean 
age  =  43.0)  who 
themselves  as  primary 
caregivers  of  a  depressed  family  member  were  recruited 
through a consumer marketing company. Upon recruitment, 
we  excluded  family  caregivers  who  were  themselves 
diagnosed  with  a  major  depression.  The  participants  were 
informed  at  their  recruitment  that  this  is  a  two-phase 
deployment  study of  a  tracking  tool  and  that  their posts  in 
the  first  phase  (i.e.  FMCT  study)  would  be  shared  in  the 
second  phase  (i.e.  FMCT-S  study).  All  of  the  family 

caregivers  agreed  to  participate  in  both  studies  from  the 
beginning  of  recruitment.  The  family  caregivers  filled  out 
surveys about their socio-demographic data and the mental 
conditions  of  their  care  recipients  and  gave  informed 
consent  before  the  FMCT  study  began.  We  also  required 
consent from care recipients for participation. Both studies 
were  reviewed  and  approved  by  the  ethical  committee  of 
the first author’s organization (ethics review ID: H27-011). 

Participants: Family Caregivers 
Two  months  following  the  FMCT  study  [51],  the  family 
caregivers participated in a six-week follow-up study using 
FMCT-S.  One  family  caregiver who  dropped out from  the 
initial  study  with  FMCT  returned  and  participated  for  the 
current study. The following are the relationships of the 15 
caregivers,  nine  spouses,  two  parents,  two  daughters,  and 
two siblings (Table 1). All of the caregivers lived with their 
care  recipient  and  held  primary  responsibility  for  looking 
after  them.  Six  caregivers  provided  one-to-one  care  and 
nine  provided  care  with  other  family  members  living 
together. Seven caregivers were full-time homemakers (FT-
hm), six had full-time jobs outside the home (FT-out), one 
worked part-time (PT), and one worked at home (HM). 

Conditions of Care Recipients 
The  ages  of  the  care  recipients  ranged  from  24  to  59 
(mean=43.1). Eight were male, and seven were female. On 
average,  the  care  recipients  had  their  initial  onset  of 
depression about eight years earlier (min.=1 year, max.=19 
years).  Nine  had  experienced  relapses.  All  of  the  care 
recipients  held  jobs  or  went  to  college  before  getting 
depressed.  They  were  all  homebound  when  they  were 
recruited  for  the  FMCT  study,  but  two  (IDs  10  and  13) 
returned  to  work  during  the  FMCT  deployment  study.  All 
regularly saw a doctor and took antidepressants daily. 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 222Page 5 
 
 
 
 
Procedure 
During  the  two-month  interval  between  the  FMCT  and 
FMCT-S deployment studies, we added the sharing feature 
to  the  tracking  tool.  Before  the  FMCT-S  deployment,  we 
mailed the details of the sharing feature to the participants’ 
homes  and  we  also  notified  them  by  telephone.  We  asked 
the participants to do the following three actions: (1) enter 
their  profile  before  the  FMCT-S  deployment  study,  (2) 
remove or privatize their previous posts from the first phase 
(by pressing the “private” button) if any, and (3) reconfirm 
with  their  care  recipients  about  sharing  information  with 
others and obtain consent from them again. 

Once the study started, the family caregivers used FMCT-S 
for  six  weeks  in  their  homes.  The  family  caregivers  were 
again asked to use it every single day, if possible. After six 
weeks  of  deployment,  we  randomly  selected  ten  family 
caregivers (indicated by “x” in the “Intv.” column of Table 
1) and individually interviewed them each for 1-1.5 hrs. 

Data Collection 
We wanted to analyze the family caregiver reactions to the 
sharing  feature  as  well  as  whether  they  changed  how  they 
recorded  the  information  and  whether  sharing  practice 
impacted their relationship with the care recipients.  

Log Data: We gathered the data entries to FMCT-S during 
the  six-week  study  to see  if  there were  any  changes  in  the 
participants’ tracking activity. Each entry was stored with a 
user ID and a timestamp.  

Semi-structured Interviews: Similar to a previous work [51] 
(i.e., the first phase), we drafted semi-structured interviews 
through collaboration with our research team’s psychiatrist. 
The interviews explored the family caregiver’s experiences 
with FMCT-S by focusing on the sharing feature’s impact. 
The family  caregivers  were  asked detailed questions  about 
the impact of sharing their own data and seeing others’ data 
on their daily lives: their feelings, caregiving activities, and 
communication with their care recipients.  

The  interview  data  were  all  audio-recorded,  transcribed, 
and analyzed using inductive qualitative methods [45]. The 
first author arranged the quotes into an affinity diagram and 
inductively  generated  high-level  themes  in  the  data.  The 
themes  were  then  discussed  to  iteratively  refine  the  codes. 
The  findings  below  emerged  from  this  collaborative 
analysis.  

RESULTS 
The  sharing  feature  seemed  to  affect  the  caregivers  and 
their  communication  with  their  care  recipients  in  multiple 
ways.  In  this  section,  we  report  the  overall  effects  of  the 
sharing  feature  by  comparing  the  tool  usage  patterns 
between  phase  1  (FMCT)  and  phase  2  (FMCT-S)  and 
present  our  findings  in  detail  based  on  semi-structured 
interviews. 

General Usage Patterns 
Family caregivers continued using the same device as in the 
first  phase  to  record  their  data:  seven  caregivers  used 

phase 1

phase 2

450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

s
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c

f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

0

10

20
Days

30

40

Figure 3. Average number of Japanese characters entered  
per person. 

s
e
s
s
e
c
c
a
f
o
r
e
b
m
u
N

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

timeline

review

0

10

20
Days

30

40

Figure 4. Average number of accesses to other caregivers’ 
records per person. 

smartphones,  four  used  personal  computers,  six  used  a 
family-shared  computer,  and  one  used  a  family-shared 
tablet  (including  multiple  uses  of  devices).  The  family 
caregivers  who  provided  care  with  other  family  members 
talked  about  FMCT-S 
them.  While  some  family 
caregivers  seemed  to  share  their  findings  with  other 
members,  few  showed 
the  screen  or  collaboratively 
recorded the data.  

to 

Amount of Text Input 
To measure the caregivers’ active engagement with the tool, 
we  counted  the  number  of  characters  entered  in  the  free-
form  textboxes.  The  frequency  of  access  was  not  used 
because  some  caregivers  did  not  log  out  and  it  did  not 
reflect  their  engagement.  Figure  3  shows  the  average 
number  of  Japanese  characters  per  person  during  phase  1 
(without  the  sharing  feature)  and  phase  2  (with  it).  The 
min/max and average number of characters entered by each 
participant  during  phase  2  is  shown  in  Table  1  (#chars). 
Overall, the family caregivers tended to enter more data in 
the  second  phase  than  in  the  first;  on  average,  221 
characters  were  entered  per  day  per  person  in  the  second 
phase,  which  exceeds  the  average  of  137  characters  in  the 
first phase. A paired t-test indicated that the average amount 
of  caregiver  input  significantly  increased  in  the  second 
phase  (t[41]=-11.74,  p<.01).  According  to  the  family 
caregivers they added more contextual information to their 
descriptions so that others can easily follow the contents.  

Frequency of Seeing Others’ Records 
Figure  4  shows  the  average  number  of  accesses  to  other 
patients’  health  records  (“reviewing  section”  of  other 
participants)  and  caregiving  journals  (“timeline  section”) 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 222Page 6 
 
 
 
per person over time. The total number of accesses to other 
care  recipients’  health  records  and  caregiving  journals  are 
provided  in  Table  1  (#acs_pat,  #acs_jnl).  Overall,  the 
family  caregivers  looked  at  other  caregiving  journals  far 
more  frequently  than  other  patients’  health  records.  The 
details  of  how  they  used  the  records  of  others  will  be 
provided below in the interview findings.  

Interview Findings 
Six  themes  emerged  from  the  interview  coding.  The 
prevalence  of  each  theme  is  reported  in  Table  1  (columns 
T1-T6). 

T1. Learning from Others 
All  the  participants  we  interviewed  noted  that  they  were 
inspired  by  reading  the  caregiving  journals.  Although  the 
caregivers  presumed  that  the  coping  strategies  of  others 
may  not  work  for  their  case,  they  still  found  useful  tips 
from  the  caregiving  journals.  For  example,  one  participant 
said: 

[ID 7, full-time job outside,  wife of care recipient] There are no 
correct  answers  to  these  things.  The  caregiving  tips  of  other 
people  may  not  work  for  my  case,  but  it’s  important  to  know 
how  others  are  dealing  with  this  kind  of  stuff.  I  can  gain  new 
insights, apply their strategies, and try new things. 

Participants  not  only  learned  from  others’  success  stories 
(“positive  outcomes”  and  “lessons  learned”)  but  also  from 
their  failures  (“negative  outcomes”).  One  participant 
described how she could see things more objectively and be 
creative in finding ways to resolve others’ problems: 

[ID 1, full-time job outside, daughter of care recipient] ID3 wrote 
in  her  caregiving  journal  that  she  had  argued  with  her  mother 
over  food.  Her  mother  gave  her  some  food  that  she  liked  but 
she  didn’t  take  it.  It  sounds  silly,  but  I’ve  actually  had  similar 
arguments  with  my  mom,  too.  When  I  read  about  their 
arguments,  I  thought  ID3  should  depend  on  her  mother  more. 
At the same time, I realized that I should do the same with my 
mom.  

Even  though  the  family  caregivers  gained  insights  by 
reading other caregiving journals, they seemed to learn little 
from seeing the conditions of other patients. Many said that 
the  patients’  health  records  (graphs)  were  too  detailed  to 
gain 
transferrable  knowledge.  Some  also 
mentioned that they were reluctant to look at other patients’ 
data because they felt it was too personal: 

insight  or 

[ID  3,  full-time  job  outside,  daughter  of  care  recipient]  I 
somehow  felt  uncomfortable  looking  at  other  patients’  health 
records. I felt like I was stepping into their privacy, like peeking 
into  their  homes.  I  don’t  think  I  looked  at  other  health  records 
more  than  just  a  few  times.  (…)  It  was  good  to  see  many 
different  patterns  in  how  depression  affects  people.  But  other 
than that, there wasn’t much to learn from other patient graphs. 

T2: Gaining Emotional Support 
Emotional support was another benefit gained by the family 
caregivers  from  using  the  shared  feature.  In  line  with 
previous  works,  for  most  of  our  family  caregivers,  seeing 
other  caregivers  experiencing  a  similar  situation  everyday 
served  as  a  type  of  emotional  support  [7,46].  One 

participant explained how sharing a caregiving journal with 
others was different from other forms of sporadic support: 

[ID 6, work at home, wife of care recipient] I know people who 
are  caring  for  a  depressed  family  member.  I  can  share  my 
feelings with them, but we don’t talk every day, just when there 
is  big  news.  But  with  FMCT-S,  I  felt  like  we  are  living  through 
the  same  time.  (…)  Just  knowing  that  there  are  people  going 
through the same difficulties made me feel better.  

Another caregiver echoed that sentiment: 

[ID  4,  work  part  time,  sister  of  care  recipient]  I  learned  that 
others  are  also  distressed.  They  are  all  worried  and  anxious 
about the people they are caring for. I didn’t feel alone. We are 
sharing similar problems. 

As  with  IDs  6  and  4,  although  FMCT-S’s  sharing  feature 
did not  allow  the family  caregivers  to exchange  messages, 
they still seemed to gain emotional support by reading other 
caregiving journals.  

T3: Being Considerate of Others when Writing 
Gradually,  the  family  caregivers  started  to  see  others  as 
peer learners who are facing similar challenges.  Such sense 
of  belonging  changed  their  writing  styles.  For  example, 
many  caregivers  said  that  they  added  more  contextual 
information  to  their  journals,  which  increased  the  number 
of characters in them (Figure 3): 

[ID 7, full-time job outside,  wife of care recipient] I noticed that 
it’s  easier  to  follow  others’  posts  when  there  was  contextual 
information. To learn from others’ posts, we need to know why 
and how something happened. (…) I decided to add contextual 
information  to  my  posts  too,  so  that  others  can  follow  them 
more easily. 

In  addition,  the  caregivers  became  more  cautious  about 
what they write in their caregiving journals. One participant, 
whose  husband  returned  to  work  during  the  first  phase, 
explained  how  she  refrained  from  writing  about  joyous 
events in the presence of other caregivers: 

[ID  10,  work  at  home,  wife  of  care  recipient]  My  husband  got 
much better, and we finally took a family trip. We had so much 
fun and I wanted to write about it in my journal, but I chose not 
to.  Many  are  still  groping  around  in  the  dark,  some  can’t  even 
leave  their  houses.  If  they  read  my  good  news  in  my  journal, 
they  may  feel  offended  or  discouraged.  They  might  retaliate 
against their own sick person. I didn’t want them to feel that way. 

Family caregivers not only avoided writing about extremely 
good  events  but  they  also  refrained  from  expressing 
negative  feelings  about  caregiving.  According  to  the 
participants,  they  were  reluctant  to  express  their  criticism 
about  their  caring  situations  for  two  reasons.  First,  the 
family caregivers did not want to lower the moods of others 
by expressing negative feelings. One participant said: 

[ID  3,  full-time  job  outside,  daughter  of  care  recipient]  We  all 
want  to  learn  from  others’  posts.  (…)  I  tried  not  to  complain  in 
my  caregiving  journal  because  I  didn’t  want  to  read  the 
complaints  of  others.  Complaints  just  make  me  feel  bad,  and 
they don’t solve anything.  

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 222Page 7Second,  the  caregivers  were  concerned  that  the  care 
recipients  might  read  their posts  and feel  crushed  or  cause 
an argument. Since the caregivers sometimes used a shared 
device  (with  a  shared  login  password)  to  access  FMCT-S, 
the  care  recipients  could  access  it  even  without  the 
caregivers. One participant who sometimes showed others’ 
records to her husband said: 

[ID 11, work at home, wife of care recipient] Although I normally 
enter  the  data  when  my  husband  is  not  around,  I  don’t  write 
complaints.  (…)  My  husband  might  accidentally  see  them.  I 
don’t want to argue about them. 

Overall,  the  sharing  feature  of  FMCT-S  appeared  to  make 
family  caregivers  accountable  for  their  own  writings, 
making their posts more considerate and thoughtful. 

T4:  Using  Others’  Data  to  Discuss  Sensitive  Matters  with 
Care Recipients 
While  family  caregivers  normally  read  others’  records  by 
themselves, they sometimes shared others’ information with 
the  care  recipients.  However,  when  they  did,  they  were 
careful  about  what  information  to  share  and  how  they 
shared  with  the  recipients.  According  to  the  caregivers, 
most of them started by talking about others having similar 
problems.  For  example,  one  participant  described  how  she 
used others’ data to encourage her daughter when she was 
impacted by low atmospheric pressure: 

[ID  15,  work  at  home,  mother  of  care  recipient]  I  told  her  that 
she  isn’t  the  only  one  affected  by  low  atmospheric  pressure. 
She didn’t really look at the data that closely, but she did seem 
encouraged by knowing that she wasn’t alone. 

The  caregivers  chose  whether  to  discuss  further  by 
observing  the  recipient’s  reaction.  They  showed  others’ 
data and discussed further only when the recipients showed 
interest.  Some  caregivers  were  successful  in  using  others’ 
data  to  discuss  sensitive  family  issues  with  their  care 
recipients.  One  participant  described  how  others’  data 
helped him discuss a problem with his wife: 

[ID 9, full-time job outside, husband of care recipient] I found a 
post  describing how  things  could  be  messed  up  and  go  wrong 
once an argument gets out of hand. We have exactly the same 
problem, so we looked at it together and discussed how to solve 
it.  

Another family caregiver used others’ records to explain his 
coping strategy to his daughter:  

[ID  13,  full-time  homemaker,  father  of  care  recipient]  I  showed 
the  records  of  others  to  my  daughter  and  explained  how  the 
patients  and  caregivers  can  easily  fall  into  a  negative  loop.  I 
explained  why  I  distanced  myself  from  her  during  her  bad 
periods–it’s not that I’m abandoning her, I just need some space 
to avoid that negative loop. 

As with IDs 9 and 13, many family caregivers who shared 
others’  data  with  care  recipients  seemed  to  find  others’ 
information  useful  for  initiating  conversations  when  they 
wanted to talk about their own issues.  

T5: Increased Involvement With Care Recipients 
For  the  care  recipients,  seeing  other  caregivers’  records 
seemed  to  affect  them  in  multiple  ways.  According  to  the 
caregivers,  some  care  recipients  showed  interest  in  how 
other caregivers cared for their depressed family members, 
and  they  tried to  learn  from  them.  For  example,  ID 9 who 
had constant arguments with his wife said: 

[ID 9, full-time job outside, husband of care recipient] Previously, 
she  always  claimed  that  I  should  be  more  considerate  of  her 
feelings.  But  that’s  so  difficult.  I’ve  always  told  her  that  I  can’t 
read her thoughts unless she expresses them. (…) After seeing 
that other caregivers are also struggling with similar problems, I 
think  she  came  to  understand  that  I’m  not  the  only  one  who 
cannot  assess  the  feelings  of  their  care  recipients.  (…)  She 
started to express her feelings more. 

In addition, some care recipients seemed to feel accountable 
for their own behavior by realizing that their data are being 
shared with others [11]. For example, one participant whose 
husband returned to work during the first phase said: 

[ID 10, work at home, wife of care recipient] My husband once 
asked me what I was going to write about that day. I asked him 
what  he  wanted  me  to  write.  He  suggested  that  I  write  about 
him  going  to  the  library.  He  explained  how  difficult  it  is  for  a 
depressed person to go out and read. (…) He seemed to want 
to encourage other caregivers by showing his own recovery.  

Such  feeling  of  accountability  sometimes  led  the  care 
recipients  to  make  more  effort  to  engage  in  positive 
behaviors  than  they  might  otherwise  have  made.  For 
instance,  another  participant  who  was  caring  for  her 
husband explained: 

 [ID 7, full-time job outside, wife of care recipient] In the second 
phase,  he  did more  work  around  the  house.  (…)  He  started  to 
say things like “I’m going to hang up the laundry.” I think he was 
pleased and felt encouraged by reading about other caregivers 
who  were  working  hard  for  their  care  recipients.  I  think  he 
wanted me to write about his activities and show others that he 
too was making a big effort. 

The  positive  behaviors  of  care  recipients  were  generally 
embraced  by  caregivers.  However,  it  is  important  to  note 
that they were sometimes perceived as slightly competitive 
by the care recipients. For example, ID 9 who often read the 
records of others with his wife said: 

[ID 9, full-time job outside, husband of care recipient] One day 
we  found  a  post  from  a  caregiver  who  went  to  a  Louvre 
exhibition with her family. My wife suggested that I should write 
about us going to a Magritte exhibition.  

T6: Changes in Family Communication 
As the involvement of care recipients increased, some care 
recipients  seemed  to  access  the  app  even  without  the 
caregivers. Indeed, some participants noticed that their care 
recipients read their caregiving journals while they were out 
of  the  house.  Interestingly,  such  “spying”  by  the  care 
recipients  was  perceived  positively  by  the  caregivers.  For 
example,  ID  11  who  never  showed  her  own  caregiving 
journal to her husband said:  

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 222Page 8[ID 11,  work at  home,  wife of care recipient] I  started to notice 
that  he  was  actually  reading  the  journal.  (…)  One  day,  I  wrote 
that  it  was  tough  to  listen  to  his  complaints.  The  next  day,  he 
explained  why  he  made  them.  Even  though  I  didn’t  directly 
confront him, it was obvious that he had read my journal. (…) I 
can directly express my thoughts, but depression makes things 
complicated.  For  certain  things,  I’m  not  sure  how  I  should 
express them to my husband. I don’t want to cause a fight, so I 
suppress  myself,  which  is  probably  not  good  for  either  of  us. 
(…)  It  was  very  nice  to  have  a  way  to  indirectly  express  my 
feelings without causing trouble. I think it’s also important for the 
care recipients to know what the caregivers are thinking.  

As  with  ID  11,  the  sharing  feature  sometimes  served  as  a 
new  communication  channel 
family 
caregivers could reveal their feelings to their care recipients. 
According  to  the  caregivers,  indirectly  expressing  their 
feelings  in  the  presence  of  other  caregivers  helped  them 
reveal their feelings without getting too emotional:  

through  which 

[ID  7,  full-time  job  outside,  wife  of  care  recipient]  When  I 
revealed my thoughts in the caregiving journal, I often imagined 
my husband as my reader. (…) I explained my thoughts in detail 
and  carefully  chose  my  words  so  that  everyone,  including  my 
husband,  could  understand  them  without  getting  hurt.  (…) 
FMCT-S  helped  me  convey  feelings  to  my  husband  that  I 
couldn’t express directly. After a while, my husband also started 
to convey his true feelings to me. This definitely helped reduce 
family troubles.  

The  caregivers  noted  that  indirectly  conveying  thoughts  to 
the care recipients deepened family communication without 
causing  problems  in  the  family.  Even  though  such  use  of 
FMCT-S  was  not  very  common  among  the  participants 
(three  out  of  ten),  many  caregivers  still  mentioned  that 
communication with their care recipients improved: 

[ID  6,  work  at  home,  wife  of  care  recipient]  Family  trouble  has 
decreased. Before, he seemed to think that he was the only one 
who was suffering. But after seeing other caregivers’ records, I 
think  he  learned  that  it’s  not  just  him  who  was  suffering.  The 
caregivers  are  also  struggling  to  support  their  care  recipients. 
He seemed pleased and became more considerate to me.  

According  to  the  caregivers,  the  care  recipients  were 
pleased  to  read  other  caregivers’  journals  and  appreciated 
the  efforts  of 
the  caregivers,  creating  a  positive 
communication cycle.  

from 

the  caregivers 

DISCUSSION 
In  summary,  most  participants  in  our  interviews  reported 
that  the  sharing  feature  was  beneficial  for  improving  their 
home care and family communication. In line with previous 
works, 
the  caregiving 
learned 
experiences  of  others  and  gained  emotional  support  by 
reading their caregiving journals. Unexpectedly, the sharing 
feature  also  seemed  to  positively  affect  the  care  recipients 
who gained emotional support by reading other caregivers’ 
records  and  sometimes  were  even  motivated  to  engage  in 
feature 
In  addition, 
positive  behaviors. 
family 
the 
sometimes  played 
communication or/and mediating communication within the 
family.  For  instance,  some  care  recipients  seemed  to 
their 
actively  mention 

the  sharing 
enhancing 

their  conditions/behaviors 

role  of 

to 

caregivers  so  that  their  information  could  be  shared  with 
initiated  conversation  about 
others.  Some  caregivers 
sensitive family issues to the care recipients by alluding to 
the  records  of  other  caregivers.  Finally,  some  caregivers 
indirectly revealed their thoughts and feelings to their care 
recipients by writing them down in their journals.  

Positive Reactions from Care Recipients 
Despite  our  initial  concerns  that  the  care  recipients  may 
negatively react to caregivers who shared their information 
with  other  participants,  none  of  our  participants  reported 
getting  such  negative  reactions.  Record  anonymity  is  of 
course  a  contributing  factor.  Another  possible  reason  why 
FMCT-S’s  sharing  feature  might  have  worked  so  well  is 
that  the  caregivers  chose  their  words  very  carefully, 
especially  when  they  wrote  in  their  journals  (ID3,  11). 
Similar  to  the  findings  in  previous  works  [40,48],  our 
study’s participants did not want to read the complaints of 
other caregivers, and this concern compelled them to refrain 
from writing complaints themselves (ID 3). In addition, the 
caregivers  were  concerned  about  the  potential  impact  of 
complaints on the care recipients when they accidently read 
them (ID 11). Such concerns made their caregiving journals 
thoughtful.  Consequently,  such 
more  considerate  and 
thoughtful  posts  turned  out  to  be  encouraging  for  the  care 
recipients,  who  seemed  pleased 
the 
caregivers  are  working  hard  for  their  depressed  family 
members and hence showed more appreciation to them (ID 
6).  We  suspect  that  the  emotional  support  gained  by  the 
care  recipients  from  the  tool  outweighed  the  negative 
feelings of surveillance.  

to  realize 

that 

However,  such  positive  effects  on  the  care  recipients  rely 
on  the  good  intentions  of  family  caregivers.  If  someone 
wrote  a  thoughtless  journal  entry  or  complained  about  a 
depressed family member, the care recipients who read that 
post  would  probably  be  affected.  We  infer  that  the 
caregivers  were  strongly  self-controlled  to  avoid  writing 
complaints or rude posts because their care recipients were 
aware  of  their  tracking  activities:  the  care  recipients  had 
already given their consent to participate in this study.  

Involvement of Care Recipients 
Our  findings  show  how  the  sharing  feature  gradually 
increased the care recipients’ involvement with the tool (ID 
9, 10, 7). Since increased involvement of the care recipients 
improved the family support and communication, one might 
suggest  designing  a  tracking  tool  that  facilitates  the 
participation of care recipients.  

increase  care 

A  straightforward  way 
recipients’ 
to 
participation  is  to  divide  the  role  of  recording  (i.e.,  care 
recipients  recording  their  conditions  themselves)  with  the 
caregivers.  Such  an  approach  has  been  suggested  and 
studied  elsewhere  [20].  Although  previous  works  show 
promising results for this approach, we argue that it is less 
applicable  for  our  case.  First,  the  family  caregivers  in  our 
study  are  trying  to  optimize  their  own  coping  strategies. 
Dividing the role of recording with the care recipients may 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 222Page 9spark  conflicts.  Indeed,  many  caregivers  seem  skeptical 
about  the  self-reports  of  the  depressed  family  members 
because  they  become  forgetful  during  depressive  episodes 
[39,51].  Thus,  we  believe  that  it  is  best  for  the  family 
caregivers  to  assume  full  responsibility  for  the  recordings. 
In addition, note that many of the positive effects found in 
our  study  were  actually  caused  by  excluding  the  care 
recipients  from  the  system.  If  the  care  recipients  could 
directly record their conditions into the system, they may no 
longer actively tell their condition to the caregivers (ID 10, 
7).  The  indirect  communication  channel  through  which 
family caregivers reveal their feelings to the care recipients 
would also disappear (ID 11, 7).  

the 

that 

findings 

sharing 
from 

the  social  support 

Facilitating Social Support in the Family 
feature 
suggest 
Our 
improved/enhanced 
family 
caregivers.  While  previous  works  on  health-tracking 
technologies  have  also  tried  to  facilitate  support  for  care 
recipients  from  family  (and  friends)  [14,35,37,49],  studies 
show  that  the  attempts  have  generally  failed.  In  those 
studies,  care  recipients  are  typically  cast  as  the  primary 
users  of  the  tracking  technologies.  To  facilitate  support 
from family and friends, the care recipients are provided a 
feature that can invite a support person from their personal 
social  networks 
interventions.  Unfortunately, 
findings  have  shown  that  care  recipients  are  generally 
reluctant to choose a support person [35,37]. They seemed 
to  perceive  it  as  problematic  or  at  least  unhelpful  to  share 
their  health  issues  with  a  person  who  is  not  pursuing  the 
same health goal, even if he/she is a close friend or a family 
member [14].  

their 

to 

In  contrast  to  previous  works,  family  caregivers  are  the 
primary users of tracking technologies in our study. While 
care  recipients  in  previous  works  did  not  feel  the  need  to 
share their problems with family [14], the family caregivers 
in  our  study  seemed  to  perceive  it  as  beneficial  to  share 
their  problems  with  the  care  recipients.  This  makes  sense 
because  family  caregivers  are  struggling  with  issues 
associated  with  care  recipients  (while  care  recipients  are 
normally  struggling  with  their  own  health  issues).  Thus, 
caregivers  were  more  likely  to  take  the  opportunity  to 
discuss their problems with care recipients. We suspect that 
such  discussion  made  the  care  recipients  realize  that  they 
were  sharing  similar  values  with  the  caregivers  [2],  which 
involvement  of  care 
the  active 
eventually 
recipients. Such involvement of care recipients led them to 
healthier  family  communication  and  enhanced  the  social 
support from family caregivers. Note that our tool does not 
offer  caregivers  a  direct  link  to  communicate  with  care 
recipients  as  in  previous  works.  Since  family  caregivers 
were initially hesitant to discuss family issues with the care 
recipients due to the fear of starting conflict, we doubt that 
the  family  caregivers  would  have  used  it,  even  had  we 
provided it. We argue that other caregivers’ records served 
as  indirect  ways  to  facilitate  family  communication  and 
solicit social support from family caregivers.  

increased 

Negative Effects of Sharing 
Although  the  family  caregivers  in  our  study  generally 
reported  that  FMCT-S  positively  affected  homecare  and 
their  relationships  with  the  care  recipients,  the  sharing 
feature  did  seem  to  import  new  concerns  that  would  not 
have  emerged  otherwise.  As  reported  in  previous  studies, 
the  sharing  feature  introduced  competition  among  the  care 
recipients  (ID  9)  [7,28].  The  caregivers  also  refrained 
themselves from writing joyous events because they feared 
offending  other  caregivers  and  causing  envy  (ID  10). 
However,  some  caregivers  who  did not know  the  situation 
complained  that  those  people  were  not  committed  enough 
in their caregiving role and not paying much attention to the 
care recipients. Another issue we found was that one of the 
caregivers  who  had  experienced  depression  himself 
described  that  it  was  sometimes  difficult  to  read  others’ 
journals  because  it  reminded  him  of  his  hard  time  in  the 
past. Future work should address these concerns. 

LIMITATIONS 
One  limitation  of  our  study  is  that  most  of  the  family 
caregivers were women. Since men and women experience 
different types of caregiver burden [43], the generalizability 
of  our  findings  may  be 
limited.  Family  caregivers’ 
relationship  with  the  care  recipients  might  also  had  an 
impact  on  family  communication.  For  example,  siblings 
and parents of the care recipients rarely showed the app to 
the  care  recipients  when  talking  about  others  because  they 
did not want to be preachy and annoy the recipients. Future 
work  should  investigate  the  impact  of  these  variables  on 
family communication.  

CONCLUSION 
This paper showed how information sharing among family 
caregivers  affected  homecare  and  family  communication. 
We developed a tracking tool that allows family caregivers 
to  record  their  caregiving  activities  and  care  recipient’s 
conditions  and  share  them  with  other  family  caregivers.  A 
deployment  study  of  our  tool  revealed  that  the  sharing 
feature not only helped the caregivers improve their coping 
strategies  but  also  positively  affected  the  care  recipients. 
Our  most  significant  finding  is  that  the  tool  provided  the 
caregivers  and  the  care  recipients  with  indirect  ways  to 
discuss  sensitive  home  issues.  Our  findings  describe  how 
direct 
the 
helped 
communication/conflict  while  still  allowing 
to 
indirectly  discuss  problems.  The  sharing  feature  also 
provided  care  recipients  indirect  ways  to  learn  and  gain 
emotional support from other caregivers, which sometimes 
motivated them to engage in positive behaviors. We believe 
these  findings  will  contribute  to  the  field  of  HCI  by 
suggesting  new  ways 
for  designing  health-tracking 
technologies and information sharing. 

sharing 

feature 

avoid 

them 

them 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work is supported by Grant for Scientific Research (A) 
17H00771 from Japan Society for the Promotion of Science 
(JSPS). 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 222Page 10REFERENCES 
1. 

Nili R Benazon and James C Coyne. 2000. Living 
with a depressed spouse. Journal of Family 
Psychology 14, 1: 71–79. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

Andrew B. L. Berry, Catherine Lim, Andrea L. 
Hartzler, Tad Hirsch, Edward H. Wagner, Evette 
Ludman, and James D. Ralston. 2017. How Values 
Shape Collaboration Between Patients with 
Multiple Chronic Conditions and Spousal 
Caregivers. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’17), 5257–5270. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025923 

Jed R Brubaker, Caitlin Lustig, and Gillian R Hayes. 
2010. PatientsLikeMe: Empowerment and 
Representation in a Patient-Centered Social 
Network. In CSCW ’10 Workshop on research in 
healthcare: past, present, and future. Retrieved 
September 19, 2017 from 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=
10.1.1.460.6665&rep=rep1&type=pdf 

Scott E Caplan and Jacob S Turner. 2007. Bringing 
theory to research on computer-mediated 
comforting communication. Computers in Human 
Behavior 23, 2: 985–998. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2005.08.003 

Yunan Chen, Victor Ngo, and Park Sun Young. 
2013. Caring for Caregivers: Designing for 
Integrality. In Proceedings of the ACM 2013 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW’13), 91–102. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2441776.2441789 

Eun Kyoung Choe, Nicole B. Lee, Bongshin Lee, 
Wanda Pratt, and Julie A. Kientz. 2014. 
Understanding quantified-selfers’ practices in 
collecting and exploring personal data. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’14), 1143–
1152. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557372 

Sunny Consolvo, Katherine Everitt, Ian Smith, and 
James A. Landay. 2006. Design requirements for 
technologies that encourage physical activity. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’06), 457–466. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124840 

Sunny Consolvo, Predrag Klasnja, David W. 
McDonald, Daniel Avrahami, Jon Froehlich, Louis 
LeGrand, Ryan Libby, Keith Mosher, and James a. 
Landay. 2008. Flowers or a robot army?: 
Encouraging awareness & activity with personal, 
mobile displays. In Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing 
(UbiComp’08), 54–63. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1409635.1409644 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

Neil S. Coulson. 2005. Receiving Social Support 
Online: An Analysis of a Computer-Mediated 
Support Group for Individuals Living with Irritable 
Bowel Syndrome. CyberPsychology & Behavior 8, 
6: 580–584. https://doi.org/10.1089/cpb.2005.8.580 

David Coyle and Gavin Doherty. 2009. Clinical 
Evaluations and Collaborative Design: Developing 
New Technologies for Mental Healthcare 
Interventions. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI’09), 2051–2060. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1519013 

Andy Crabtree, Peter Tolmie, and Will Knight. 
2017. Repacking “Privacy” for a Networked World. 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work: CSCW: An 
International Journal 26, 4–6: 453–488. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-017-9276-y 

Karen Donelan, Craig A Hill, Catherine Hoffman, 
Kimberly Scoles, Penny Hollander Feldman, Carol 
Levine, and David Gould. 2002. Challenged to 
care: informal caregivers in a changing health 
system. Health aff (Millwood) 21, 4: 222–31. 
https://doi.org/10.1377/HLTHAFF.21.4.222 

Susannah Fox and Joanna Brenner. 2012. Family 
Caregivers Online. Pew Research Center Internet & 
Technology. Retrieved September 19, 2017 from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/07/12/family-
caregivers-online/ 

Victoria Louise Franklin, Alexandra Greene, 
Annalu Waller, Stephen Alan Greene, and Claudia 
Pagliari. 2008. Patients’ engagement with “Sweet 
Talk” - a text messaging support system for young 
people with diabetes. Journal of medical Internet 
research 10, 2. https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.962 

Carolina Fuentes, Valeria Herskovic, Jurgen 
Heysen, and Monica Tentori. 2013. Towards a 
technology for caregivers’ emotional expression 
and self-reflection. In Proceedings of International 
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing and Ambient 
Intelligence (UCAmI ’13), 143–150. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-03176-7_19 

D Gammon, E Arsand, O A Walseth, N Andersson, 
M Jenssen, and T Taylor. 2005. Parent-child 
interaction using a mobile and wireless system for 
blood glucose monitoring. Journal of Medical 
Internet Research 7, 5: e57. 
https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.7.5.e57 

Roland Gasser, Dominique Brodbeck, Markus 
Degen, Jürg Luthiger, Remo Wyss, and Serge 
Reichlin. 2006. Persuasiveness of a Mobile 
Lifestyle Coaching Application Using Social 
Facilitation. In Proceedings of International 
Conference on Persuasive Technology 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 222Page 1118. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

(Persuasive’06), 27–38. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/11755494_5 

Rachael Gooberman-Hill and Shah Ebrahim. 2006. 
Informal care at times of change in health and 
mobility: A qualitative study. Age and Ageing 35, 
3: 261–266. https://doi.org/10.1093/ageing/afj065 

Ian H. Gotlib. Interpersonal and Cognitive Aspects 
of Depression. Current Directions in Psychological 
Science 1, 149–154. 
https://doi.org/10.2307/20182162 

Andrea Grimes, Desney Tan, and Dan Morris. 2009. 
Toward technologies that support family reflections 
on health. In Proceedinfs of the ACM Conference 
on Supporting Group Work (GROUP’09), 311–320. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1531674.1531721 

Gillian R. Hayes and Gregory D. Abowd. 2006. 
Tensions in designing capture technologies for an 
evidence-based care community. In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in 
computing systems (CHI ’06), 937–946. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124911 

Lesa Lorenzen Huber, Kalpana Shankar, Kelly 
Caine, Kay Connelly, L. Jean Camp, Beth Ann 
Walker, and Lisa Borrero. 2013. How In-Home 
Technologies Mediate Caregiving Relationships in 
Later Life. International Journal of Human-
Computer Interaction 29, 7: 441–455. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2012.715990 

Jina Huh and Mark S Ackerman. 2012. 
Collaborative Help in Chronic Disease 
Management: Supporting Individualized Problems. 
In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW’12), 
853–862. https://doi.org/10.1145/2145204.2145331 

24.  M Jacob, E Frank, D J Kupfer, and L L Carpenter. 

25. 

26. 

1987. Recurrent depression: an assessment of 
family burden and family attitudes. The Journal of 
clinical psychiatry 48, 10: 395–400. Retrieved 
September 18, 2017 from 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3667537 

Thomas Joiner and James C. Coyne. 1999. The 
interactional nature of depression: Advances in 
interpersonal approaches. American Psychological 
Association. https://doi.org/10.1037/10311-000 

Gabor I. Keitner, Chrisine E. Ryan, I. W. Miller, R. 
Kohn, D. S. Bishop, and N. B. Epstein. 1995. Role 
of the family in recovery and major depression. 
American Journal of Psychiatry 152, 7: 1002–1008. 
https://doi.org/https://dx.doi.org/10.1176/ajp.152.7.
1002 

27. 

Gabor I Keitner and Ivan W Miller. 1990. Family 
functioning and major depression: an overview. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

American Journal of Psychiatry 147, 9: 1128–1137. 
https://doi.org/10.1176/ajp.147.9.1128 

Predrag Klasnja and Wanda Pratt. 2012. Healthcare 
in the pocket: Mapping the space of mobile-phone 
health interventions. Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics 45, 1: 184–198. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2011.08.017 

Juddy Kopp. 1988. Self-monitoring: A literature 
review of research and practice. Social Work 
Research and Abstracts 24, 4: 8–20. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/swra/24.4.8 

Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2011. 
Understanding My Data, Myself: Supporting Self-
Reflection with Ubicomp Technologies. In 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Ubiquitous 
Computing (Ubicomp’11), 405–414. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2030112.2030166 

Deborah Lupton. 2016. The quantified self : a 
sociology of self-tracking. Polity. 

Clara Mancini, Yvonne Rogers, Keerthi Thomas, 
Adam N. Joinson, Blaine A. Price, Arosha K. 
Bandara, Lukasz Jedrzejczyk, and Bashar Nuseibeh. 
2011. In the best families: tracking and 
relationships. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’11), 2419–2428. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979296 

33.  Mark Matthews and Gavin Doherty. 2011. In the 

34. 

35. 

36. 

mood: Engaging teenagers in psychotherapy using 
mobile phones. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
conference on Human Factors in computing 
systems (CHI’11), 2947–2956. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979379 

Jeff Mitchell. 2008. Understanding Depression: A 
Complete Guide to Its Diagnosis and Treatment, 
2nd ed. Primary Care Companion to The Journal of 
Clinical Psychiatry 10, 3: 257. Retrieved 
September 18, 2017 from 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC24
46480/ 

Jami L Obermayer, William T Riley, Ofer Asif, and 
Jersino Jean-Mary. 2004. College smoking-
cessation using cell phone text messaging. Journal 
of American College Health 53, 2: 71–8. 
https://doi.org/10.3200/JACH.53.2.71-78 

Laura R. Pina, Sang-Wha Sien, Teresa Ward, Jason 
C. Yip, Sean A. Munson, James Fogarty, and Julie 
A. Kientz. 2017. From Personal Informatics to 
Family Informatics: Understanding Family 
Practices around Health Monitoring. In 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing 
(CSCW ’17), 2300–2315. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998362 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 222Page 1237.  William Riley, Jami Obermayer, and Jersino Jean-
Mary. 2008. Internet and mobile phone text 
messaging intervention for college smokers. 
Journal of American College Health 57, 2: 245–248. 
https://doi.org/10.3200/JACH.57.2.245-248 

45. 

38. 

John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, 
Matthew Chalmers Chalmers, John Rooksby, 
Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and Matthew 
Chalmers Chalmers. 2014. Personal tracking as 
lived informatics. In Proceedings of SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’14), 1163–1172. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557039 

39.  Marco de Sá, Luís Carriço, and Pedro Antunes. 

40. 

2007. Defining personalized therapies for handheld 
devices. In Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on 
Applied Computing (SAC ’07), 163–164. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1244002.1244043 

Deborah A. Salem, G. Anne Bogat, and Christina 
Reid. 1997. Mutual help goes on-line. Journal of 
Community Psychology 25, 2: 189–207. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1520-
6629(199703)25:2<189::AID-JCOP7>3.0.CO;2-T 

41.  Marén Schorch, Lin Wan, David William Randall, 
and Volker Wulf. 2016. Designing for Those who 
are Overlooked - Insider Perspectives on Care 
Practices and Cooperative Work of Elderly 
Informal Caregivers. In Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative 
Work & Social Computing (CSCW ’16), 785–797. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819999 

42. 

43. 

Karen A. Schwarz and Cheryl S. Elman. 2003. 
Identification of factors predictive of hospital 
readmissions for patients with heart failure. Heart 
Lung 32, 2: 88–99. 
https://doi.org/10.1067/mhl.2003.15 

Nidhi Sharma, Subho Chakrabarti, and Sandeep 
Grover. 2016. Gender differences in caregiving 
among family - caregivers of people with mental 
illnesses. World journal of psychiatry 6, 1: 7–17. 
https://doi.org/10.5498/wjp.v6.i1.7 

44.  Misook Sohn and Jeunwoo Lee. 2007. UP health: 
Ubiquitously persuasive health promotion with an 
instant messaging system. In CHI ’07 Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI EA ’07), 2663–2668. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1240866.1241059 

Strauss AL and Corbin JM. 1998. Basics of 
Qualitative Research : Techniques and Procedures 
for Developing Grounded Theory. Sage 
publications. Retrieved September 18, 2017 from 
file:///C:/Users/dezel/Downloads/BASIC+OF+QU
ALITATIVE+RESEARCH-Strauss&Corbin+1998 
(1).pdf 

46.  Matthieu Tixier and Myriam Lewkowicz. 2016. 

&quot;Counting on the Group&quot;: Reconciling 
Online and Offline Social Support among Older 
Informal Caregivers. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’16), 3545–3558. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858477 

Tammy Toscos, Kay Connelly, and Yvonne Rogers. 
2012. Best Intentions: Health Monitoring 
Technology and Children. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’12), 1431–1440. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208603 

Cornelia F. van Uden-Kraan, Constance H. C. 
Drossaert, Erik Taal, Bret R. Shaw, Erwin R. 
Seydel, and Mart A. F. J. van de Laar. 2008. 
Empowering Processes and Outcomes of 
Participation in Online Support Groups for Patients 
With Breast Cancer, Arthritis, or Fibromyalgia. 
Qualitative Health Research 18, 3: 405–417. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732307313429 

C Y Wang and M M Fenske. 1996. Self-care of 
adults with non-insulin-dependent diabetes 
mellitus: influence of family and friends. Diabetes 
Educ 22, 5: 465–70. Retrieved from 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8936125 

47. 

48. 

49. 

50.  Marsha White and Steve M Dorman. 2001. 

51. 

Receiving social support online: Implications for 
health education. Health Education Research: 
Theory & Practice Pages 16, 6: 693–707. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/HER/16.6.693 

Naomi Yamashita, Hideaki Kuzuoka, Keiji Hirata, 
Takashi Kudo, Eiji Aramaki, and Kazuki Hattori. 
2017. Changing Moods: How Manual Tracking by 
Family Caregivers Improves Caring and Family 
Communication. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’17), 158–169. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025843 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 222Page 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
