How to Drive a London Bus: Measuring Performance  
in a Mobile and Remote Workplace 
Gary W. Pritchard1, Pam Briggs2, John Vines1, and Patrick Olivier1 

1Culture Lab, 
School of Computing Science, 
Newcastle University, UK 
{firstname.lastname}@ncl.ac.uk 

2PaCT Lab, 
Department of Psychology, 
Northumbria University, UK 
p.briggs@northumbria.ac.uk 

ABSTRACT 
This  paper  examines  how  London  bus  drivers  have 
responded  to  performance  monitoring  via  a  telematics 
device  called  Drivewell.  This  device  calculates  a  score 
based  on  various  recordable  driving-related  events  like 
abrupt  braking  or  irregular  turning  actions.  Our  qualitative 
methodology  incorporated  semi-structured  interviews  and 
ethnographic fieldwork in order to explore drivers‘ attitudes 
towards the system and its effect on driving behaviour and 
working  conditions.  Our  findings 
illustrate  how  bus 
operators  simultaneously  accommodate  and  resist  the 
demands  Drivewell  places  upon  them.  Our  work  also 
demonstrates  how 
in 
conjunction with other driver-related technologies, creating 
a unique digital ecosystem on the modern London bus. Our 
research  contributes  to  HCI  understandings  of  digital 
surveillance  and  performance  monitoring  in  the  modern 
workplace. 

intervention  acts 

this  digital 

Author Keywords 
Public Transport; Ethnography; Telematics; Event 
Monitoring; Workplace Surveillance 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 

INTRODUCTION 
Sensor  technology  is  increasingly  deployed  as  a  part  of 
intelligent  vehicle  infrastructures  that  give  drivers  the 
capacity  to  monitor  traffic  and  navigation  information, 
check  vehicle  status,  improve  driving  quality  and  navigate 
adverse  driving  conditions  [27].  Recent  developments  in 
Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) have also allowed 
interconnected vehicles to exchange information in order to 
operate  a  more  efficient  and  passenger-friendly  service 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not  made  or 
distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that  copies  bear  this  notice 
and  the  full  citation  on the  first page. Copyrights  for  components  of  this  work 
owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is 
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to 
lists,  requires  prior specific permission and/or a  fee.  Request  permissions  from 
Permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2015, April 18 - 23 2015, Seoul, Republic of Korea. 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3145-6/15/04…$15.00 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702137 

[27],  while  minimizing  cost  and  making  the  entire  system 
more environmentally sound.  

These  developments  have  led  to  some  drivers  acquiring 
new  responsibilities  and  being  subject  to  new  forms  of 
performance  monitoring.  For  instance,  it  is  now  relatively 
straightforward  to  install  in-vehicle  data  recorders  (IVDR) 
that  monitor  driving  quality  indicators  like  speed,  braking 
and  cornering.  Individual  drivers  can  benefit  directly  from 
this  by  registering  to  either  a  Pay  As  You  Drive  (PAYD) 
insurance system that charges for distance travelled, or one 
that  rewards  good  driving  by  offering  lower  premiums  to 
those  who  achieve  target  driving  scores  [23].  On  an 
organizational  scale,  professional  drivers  may  also  be 
signed up to ‗fleet telematics‘ systems [18] that are used to 
monitor driving across an entire fleet. When integrated into 
these  can  become  highly  effective 
driver  appraisals 
performance  management  infrastructures  that  reward  good 
driving and penalize bad.  

In 2010, Transport for London (TfL)  integrated just such a 
system  onto  all  of  the  city‘s  buses.  Before  going  into 
service and starting the engine, drivers are  now required to 
place  a  key  fob  that  identifies  them  as  the  operator  onto  a 
reader  (Figure  1a).  If  they  do  not  do  this,  an  alarm  will 
sound.  This  device—known  as  Drivewell—captures  driver 
behaviour  and  provides  feedback  in  two  forms.  The  first 
offers  immediate  notification  of  undesirable  driving  or 
‗events‘,  communicated  through  a  traffic-light  module 
directly  above  the  vehicle‘s  windscreen  (Figure  1b).  The 
second provides a more detailed breakdown of performance 
that  drivers  can  access  via  a  computer  terminal  located  in 
the capital‘s bus depots. Information provided includes date 
of  journey,  vehicle,  duration,  ‗achievement‘  (given  as  a 
percentage)  and  overall  number  of  ‗events‘  (or  incidences 
of  poor  driving).  The  driver  can  also  assess 
their 
performance  over  time  through  a  series  of  graphs  or  view 
on  a  map  where  ‗events‘  occurred  (see  Figure  1c).  All  of 
this  data  is  also  relayed  to  supervisors,  who  use  it  to 
monitor  and  assess  performance.  Some  of  the  companies 
who manage bus routes offer prizes (e.g. a TV) for the best 
scores  over  a  set  period.  If  poor  scores  are  consistently 
attained, the driver can be sanctioned formally or forced to 
undertake additional training.  

Sharing & Collaboration @ WorkCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1885                             
 
Figure 1. From left to right: a) Placing the Drivewell key fob onto the reader; b) The Drivewell indicator in the driver’s cabin 
(circled red); c) The Drivewell computer terminal; and d) close-up of computer terminal screen showing Drivewell scores. 

The  aim  of  this  study  was  to  explore  the  extent  that 
Drivewell  has  been  accepted  by  bus  drivers  and  to 
understand its impact on their behaviour. In achieving this, 
we  conducted  ethnographic  fieldwork,  conducted  over  a 
period of 14 months, which consisted of continuous contact 
with  research  participants  and  formal  interviews  with  15 
drivers. Through this, we sought to achieve a sophisticated 
understanding  of  the  perceived  costs  and  benefits  of  this 
kind  of  remote  surveillance  and  the  varying  ways  drivers 
incorporated Drivewell into their work practice. In this, we 
discuss  both  how  some  have  accommodated  to,  whilst 
others  have  actively  resisted,  the  technology;  how  it  has 
transformed  driving  appraisals;  and  how 
it  works 
interdependently with other surveillance technologies.  

Our contribution to the field is three-fold. First, we advance 
HCI‘s  knowledge  on  the  ways  that  telematics  influences 
driver  behaviour,  safety  and  wellbeing  as  well  as  large-
scale  transport  informatics  (a  key  issue  for  the  Internet  of 
Things).  Second,  the  work  also  speaks  to  a  highly 
controversial  theoretical  debate  about  the  privileging  of 
data-performance  in  the  management  of  a  workforce  [5]. 
Finally, we assess the utility of Drivewell and consider new 
forms  of  resistance  against  modern  forms  of  digital 
surveillance.  

BACKGROUND 

Telematics and Pay As You Drive (PAYD) 
There have been numerous studies about the deployment of 
telematics technology in private vehicles, with considerable 
attention  being  paid  to  the  relative  costs  and  benefits  of 
PAYD.  Introduced  in  the  late  1990s  as  an  innovative 
method  of  determining  insurance  premiums,  PAYD  uses  a 
GPS receiver and a small on-board computer to record data 
on location, speed, mileage and time of driving. A reduction 
in  cost  of  this  technology  has  facilitated  the  emergence  of 
new  business  models  that  specifically  target  vulnerable 
drivers,  like  the  young  and  inexperienced  (who  typically 
have to pay large insurance premiums) [12]. 

Studies  in  this  field  have  illustrated  how  these  initiatives 
can have a positive affect on driving behaviour. Bolderdijk 
et  al  [4]  studied  a  group  of  young  drivers  who  had  signed 
up to a PAYD system that allowed them to save money on 
their insurance premium if they adhered to predefined speed 

limits. Speed was monitored over the period of a year with 
PAYD  drivers  showing  significantly  reduced  speed  when 
compared with non-PAYD drivers. Benefits extend beyond 
personal  gain:  economic  and  environmental  impact  studies 
have  illustrated that PAYD  schemes can  be  more  effective 
for lowering fuel consumption than tax on gasoline [28].  

Despite  these  benefits,  a  number  of  costs  have  been 
identified  in  the  literature.  Duri  et  al  [14]  for  instance, 
identified the potential for data misuse, including the risk of 
it being sold to third parties without explicit consent. They 
also  highlighted  the  danger  of  those  with  malicious  intent 
accessing driver location. Subsequent studies by Iqbal et al 
[19; 20] have also outlined the privacy and security risks of 
leaked or hacked GPS data, in terms of the identification of 
home  addresses  and  the  unsolicited  monitoring  of  driver 
behaviour and style.  

There  is  also  an  argument  that  the  telematic  devices  can 
over-complicate  the  task  of  driving.  Lansdown  et  al  [21], 
for instance, describe the problems associated with a range 
of  new  ‗additional-to-driving‘  activities,  including  both 
operations  that  are  unrelated  to  driving  (e.g.  the  use  of 
mobile phones) and tasks that are driving-related, but make 
the  activity  more  convoluted  (e.g.  navigation  and  route 
guidance systems).  As  such, there  is reason to  hypothesise 
that  telematics  systems—either  because  of  in-car  feedback 
or  through  a  driver  consciously  changing  their  behaviour 
because  of  the  awareness  of  being  monitored—might 
adversely  complicate  driving  and,  thus,  adversely  affect  it 
and increase the risk of accident. 

Driver surveillance and appraisal 
We  see  telematics  in  general  and  remote  monitoring  of 
driver performance in particular as sitting  within the wider 
remit of surveillance. Sociological contributions in this field 
are often dystopian in theme (e.g. [16]), and concerned with 
the concepts of ‗power‘, ‗politics‘ and ‗employee meaning-
to  psychological 
making‘.  This  stands 
contributions  where  there  is  a  greater  concern  for  the 
efficacy  of  surveillance  and  those  factors  (including 
economic ones) that make it beneficial in the workplace [1]. 
The earliest published theories of management, dating back 
to 1916, understood control and monitoring as central to the 
supervisor‘s  task  [15].  Employee  monitoring  therefore  is 

in  contrast 

Sharing & Collaboration @ WorkCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1886 
well established and related to long-standard practices such 
as  clocking  in  and  out,  measuring  output  and  payment  by 
task  completion.  The  development  of  information  systems 
gave  early  large-scale  organizations  the  ability  to  police 
their  subordinates  and  gain  an  advantage  over  their 
commercial  rivals  [2].  It  has  also  been  shown  surveillance 
can  diminish  employee  wellbeing  and  the  nature  and 
intensity  of  it  says  much  about  how  a  company  views  its 
workers [1]. 

Surveillance  and  remote  appraisal  practices  have  steadily 
grown within vehicle fleet management,  where issues such 
as  speed,  safety  and  timeliness  are  key  to  the  successful 
running  of  a  business.  Historically,  driver-appraisals  were 
more subjective and made by a person. However, a number 
of key  indicators can  now be objectively  measured via the 
various telematics platforms, which can identify and reward 
those who drive within established parameters. Simsek et al 
[33]  identify  a  number  of  such  objective  indicators, 
including  speed,  the  idle  duration  of  vehicles,  fuel  costs—
all  indirect  measurements  of  good  driver  performance. 
Additionally,  where  it  is  important  to  map  the  position  of 
vehicles  in  the  fleet  in  relation  to  each  other,  GPS  based 
metrics  such  as  headway  (distance  between  vehicles)  can 
also be used as a key performance indicator (e.g. [27]). 

Bus drivers 
Professional  bus  drivers  face  difficult  and  taxing  daily 
tasks.  They  must  negotiate  a  range  of  challenges  in  their 
physical environment, both outside and inside their vehicle, 
including  traffic  congestion,  passenger  demands  and  the 
maintenance  of  good  operational  control  of  the  bus. 
Research  spanning  over  fifty  years  has  demonstrated  that 
this is one of the most stressful jobs, leading to a range of 
negative physical, behavioural and psychological outcomes 
[35].  In  the  1950s,  a  series  of  studies  by  Morris  and 
colleagues (e.g. [24]) showed that bus drivers were twice as 
likely  to  die  from  coronary  heart  disease  (CHD)  than 
conductors  working  alongside  them.  In  1991  Rosengren  et 
al [32] found CHD rates in bus drivers were three times the 
rate of 30 other sampled populations, once socio-economic 
factors  had  been  taken  into  consideration.  In  a  range  of 
studies  that  assessed  perceived  stressors  associated  with 
such  poor  health  outcomes,  69%  of  drivers  cited  traffic  as 
the  main  problem  [13]  although  fatigue  associated  with 
unusual  or  demanding  shift  patterns  is  also  a  known 
problem leading to poor driver health [8]. If we add to this 
the  known  psychological  impact  associated  with  difficult 
interactions  with  passengers  [35];  the  musculoskeletal 
disorders  linked  with  poor  cabin  posture  [35]  and  the 
gastrointestinal  problems  associated  with  meal  hour 
irregularity and  generally poor eating  habits [35] then it is 
not surprising to find  that bus drivers show unusually high 
levels of absenteeism [37] and high job turnover [25]. 

Recent  years  have  seen  further  demands  placed  upon 
London‘s  bus  drivers,  including  the  elimination  of  cash 
payments  [29]  and  the  introduction  of  ‗headway‘  system 

where  drivers  monitor  the  distance  of  the  bus  in  front  and 
behind via an LCD display [30]. In part, our work analyses 
a 
this 
occupational group that further reduces their autonomy. 

technological  demand  placed  upon 

further 

METHOD 
The  data  presented  here  was  collected  over  a  period  of  14 
months  as  part  of  on-going  research  studying  digital 
technologies and the work practices of London bus drivers. 
Our  results  are  derived  from  qualitative  data,  collected 
primarily  through  ethnography  and  semi-structured,  in-
depth  interviews  with  15  bus  drivers,  10  of  whom  were 
interviewed  twice.  On  average,  our  interviews  lasted  50 
minutes  and  all  were  audio-recorded  and  transcribed 
verbatim.  

this  activity.  Our 

Ethnography  attempts  to  understand  the  ‗social  meanings 
and  ordinary  activities‘  of  a  group,  as  they  occur  in 
‗naturally  occurring  setting‘  [6,  p.10].  This  is  achieved  by 
researchers  observing  and  participating  in  as  many  of  the 
activities  of  a  cultural  group  as  possible.  Although  for 
practical  reasons  we  were  unable  to  participate  in  the 
activity  of  driving,  we  spent  as  much  time  as  possible 
observing 
fieldwork  consisted  of 
‗focused‘  bus  riding  around  London  for  a  total  of  five 
weeks  (two  at  the  beginning  of  fieldwork  and  three  at  the 
end).  Here  the  researcher  either  shadowed  a  participant 
while  they  were  driving  or  rode  with  one  as  a  fellow 
passenger. During these rides, the driver would be asked to 
provide  a  commentary  of  the  journey  as  it  relates  to 
Drivewell  scores. One driver  also  wore a  wearable camera 
that  automatically  takes  pictures  at  10-second  intervals 
during two workdays. The images were later played back to 
to  reflect  on  Drivewell 
the  driver  who  was  asked 
considerations  for  each  part  of  his  route.  A  detailed 
fieldwork diary was kept to record all of these interactions. 

As the researchers already knew five participants, we were 
able to elicit perspectives in more sociable settings, either at 
bus  garages  during  their  breaks  or  in  cafes  and  pubs  after 
work.  Employing  the  recruitment  strategy  of  ‗snowball-
sampling‘  [3],  we  asked  these  informants  to  identify  other 
potential  participants.  A  plethora  of  classic  ethnographies 
have demonstrated how ‗key informants‘ like these work to 
smooth  access  (e.g.  [36]).  However  this  familiarity  also 
meant  that  we  had  to  pay  acute  attention  to  reflexivity, 
affording a genuine consideration of the partialities and bias 
we might bring into our work.  

After  fieldwork,  we  assembled  all  the  raw  data  (interview 
transcripts  and  fieldwork  diary)  on  a  Microsoft  word 
document to get an overview. We brought order to this by 
organizing  sections under categories and then  we drew out 
overarching  themes.  We  then  sorted  the  data  further  by 
breaking these themes into codes. This allowed us to group 
information together and assess related material. 

Sharing & Collaboration @ WorkCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1887FINDINGS 
Four substantial  themes  were identified  from  this analysis: 
accommodating  and  accepting  Drivewell;  questioning  the 
value of  Drivewell; resisting  and subverting  Drivewell and 
managing multiple forms of performance monitoring. Each 
of these is discussed in the following sections. 

Accommodating and accepting Drivewell 
Interviews  provided  an  initial  opportunity  to  explore  how 
our participants have incorporated Drivewell into their work 
routines.  As  will  be  noted  throughout  our  findings, 
Drivewell is hugely divisive—while some drivers see it as a 
positive way of improving passenger service and gathering 
constructive feedback, others regard it as inherently flawed 
and  counterproductive.  However, 
that 
Drivewell had impacted on behaviour for some. Throughout 
bus  journeys  the  lead  author  took  with  our  participant 
drivers, it was observed how they would frequently glance 
at  the  Drivewell  module  located  above  their  windscreen. 
Jimmy,  who  was  one  of  the  most  enthusiastic  drivers  in 
regards to the  system,  was observed to check  the indicator 
more than most: 

it  was  clear 

Interviewer: Do you keep an eye on that a lot? 
Jimmy: Yes, yes, yes. Not to go red. 
Interviewer:  And  do  you  find  it  quite  responsive,  like  if  you 
brake? 
Jimmy: Yes, you have to go smoothly and nicely, so, otherwise 
they go red, it's not good.  

Jimmy‘s  use  of  Drivewell  is  illustrative  of  its  capacity  to 
encourage  a  form  of  self-surveillance.  Unlike  most  of  the 
drivers  we  spoke  to,  Jimmy  appears  to  have  accepted 
Drivewell  fully.  When  asked  if  he  felt  it  had  made  him  a 
safer  driver,  he  noted:  Hundred  percent.  Hundred  percent.  If 
there's  no  monitors  on  the  buses,  some  drivers,  they  don't  care. 
They  just  drive  whatever  they  like.  Because  of  that  [Drivewell], 
they are controlled. Alan shared a similar sentiment: “Well, it 
helps.  It  probably  makes  you  try  that  little  bit  harder  to  get  a 
better score, you know?” As Alan alludes to here, one of the 
perceived  values  of  Drivewell  was  the  encouragement  it 
would  give  drivers  to  achieve  ―better‖  or  ―good‖  scores. 
However,  what  was  considered  to  be  a  good  score  or  not 
differed widely across our participants. This was not helped 
by  seemingly  frequent  changes  from  TfL  and  local  bus 
garages in defining ―target‖ scores and how these related to 
the  traffic  light  feedback  system  situated  on  the  buses. 
Jimmy, for example, tried to achieve green all the time and 
a  100%  target.  Nobby  was  another  driver  that  appreciated 
the system and the feedback it gave—however, he typically 
aimed  for  a  much  lower  score:  “The  thing  is  80%  is  the 
guideline.  As  long  as  you  stick  to  around  that  then  you  can  go 
under  the  radar,  as  they  say.”  Alan  explained  how  while  he 
did  check  on  his  scores  frequently,  he  was  careful  not  to 
attain too high a score all the time: 

Alan: I think I drive about the right speed and the right comfort, 
and I try and get the balance. If you try and get too much of a 
high score I think you’re going to slow down a bit too much. I 
like  to  get  a happy  medium  –  get  around  reasonably quick  but 

not too  quick  so  it’s  too  uncomfortable.  Have  the  score  sort of 
above average. 

It  was  notable  how,  while  all  of  the  drivers  did  check  on 
their  scores,  it  was  only  a  small  number  who  took  it  very 
seriously.  For  instance,  Erik  targeted  “between  86  and  94 
percent”  but  stated:  ―I  don’t  worry  about  it.  […]  As  long  as  I 
keep  my  score  exactly  the  same  every  week,  I  like  to  be  in  the 
amber.” In a similar vein, Ray explained how he did check-
in  on  his  scores  but  he  didn‘t  feel  this  impacted  on  his 
driving behaviour: ―I drive the same way as I do day in day out. 
Like I say, I check my scores every now and again, and they seem 
fine to me.” 

Bob  was  an  example  of  a  very  cautious  and  careful  bus 
driver, who prided himself in providing what he considered 
“good service” to passengers. He explained how: ―Service to 
me  is  comfortable  drive  and  safe  drive,  and  if  passengers  are 
happy,  then  you’re  happy  and  everybody  is  happy.”  Bob  had 
become  weary  in  recent  years  of  the  ways  various  bus 
companies  had  developed  systems  to  ―catch  drivers  out‖. 
He regularly checked his Drivewell score but admitted this 
was  more  out of curiosity rather than a genuine  interest in 
receiving feedback on his driving. 

Bob:  I  sometimes  look  to  see;  “They  have  invested  so  much 
money on it, let me see what they’re up to,” for that purpose, 
but it’s not to see how well I was driving, because I know that 
I was driving well. I mean, I don’t have customer complaints, 
so as long as they’re thinking that I’m giving a good service.  

While  the  primary  way  in  which  drivers  spoke  about  the 
feedback  they  got  from  Drivewell  was  their  overall  scores 
for certain periods of time or routes, it was also noted how 
the  system  provided  a  useful  means  for  modifying  driving 
in specific areas. As will be discussed in more detail in the 
next section, one of the attributes of the Drivewell system is 
that it registers changes in the quality of road surfaces and 
bus  suspension.  While  this  can  lead  to  problems  with  the 
quality  of  data  collected,  this  was  also  useful  for  some 
drivers  in  modifying  how  they  drive  certain  routes.  For 
example,  Jack  was  initially  very  frustrated  with  Drivewell 
but has come to terms with it over time: I hated it when it first 
came  in,  but  as  I  now  am  regularly  around  100%  on  it  I  don’t 
mind.” Jack explained how he started to see the value of the 
system  through  the  level  of  feedback  it  provides  a  driver 
about  the  locations  of  events.  As  highlighted  in  the 
introduction, drivers can also use a computer terminal at the 
garage  to  get  more  of  a  detailed  breakdown  of  how 
Drivewell has measured their driving. He explained: 

Jack: It will also tell you any number of incidents, which may 
be where you did break hard.  You can then get out a map, it 
will produce a map on that, show you exactly where, and in a 
lot of cases you will go, “Oh, yes, I remember that. That car 
pulled out in front of me” and you had to hit the brakes. 

Through use of the Drivewell terminal, Jack explained how 
he  eventually  identified  a  specific  location  that  always 
caused a negative event on his report. “There was one pothole 
on my route. When I first started driving that route I hit it. From 
then on I noticed all the drivers on that route were just pulling out 

Sharing & Collaboration @ WorkCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1888around there, because actually this pothole was so bad it broke a 
bus.”  As  a  result,  Jack  explained  how  he  had  modified  his 
driving down this stretch of road to avoid the pothole, and 
consequently saw an improvement in his Drivewell scores. 

Some  of  our  participants  described  how  a  competitive 
this  was 
culture  has  emerged  among  some  drivers; 
especially  evident  when  a  driver  would  log-on  to  the 
Drivewell terminal in the communal areas of the bus depot.  

Nobby: When you put your Drivewell key in, which should be 
a personal thing, and it comes up, people start gathering, and 
they start looking at your score and what percentage you get. 
So yes, it can become a sort of competition 

As well as being seen as valuable as a source for reflecting 
upon and changing driving behavior, some drivers also felt 
that Drivewell contributed greater security and protection to 
drivers. Nobby explained how ―in many ways it’s good, that if 
you have an accident it will hopefully in many ways help you, not 
hinder you. Because it can say that you weren’t braking hard. You 
weren’t driving stupid”. This view was echoed by Jimmy: ―It's 
good  because  if  you  have  accident,  all  covered.  Because 
everything's  recorded.  Speed,  how  was  the  turns,  everything 
recorded.  So  in  that  case  we  are  covered,  all  the  records  are 
there.” 

Questioning the value of Drivewell 
While  many  of  our  drivers  did  see  the  value—or  some  of 
the value—in  monitoring the  quality of their driving,  most 
also  felt  that  Drivewell  went  beyond  what  was  reasonable 
and  necessary.  A  selection  of  our  sample  made  explicit 
reference  to  ‗big  brother‘  when  asked  about  their  general 
perceptions  of  the  system:  “See,  a  lot  of  people  when  it  first 
came  out didn’t  like  it, because it  is  like  big brother  is  watching 
you” (Nobby). Instead of judging it as a positive system that 
helps  to improve their driving by  giving them constructive 
feedback,  Drivewell  was  regarded  with  some  suspicion. 
Drivers  believed  the  real  motivation  behind  it  was  to 
increase  the  capacity  to  punish  drivers:  “I  don’t  think  the 
people, who invented that, really thought about that [constructive 
feedback].  They  thought  about,  “This  is  a  way  to  catch  drivers” 
(Bob).  Bob‘s  comments 
illustrate  how  Drivewell  has 
increased  feelings  of  control  and  diminished  feelings  of 
trust between bus drivers and their employers.  

Regardless  of  whether  drivers  had  positive  or  negative 
feelings towards Drivewell, they were always framed by an 
overarching  suspicion  of 
the  system‘s  accuracy  and 
efficacy.  Employees  felt  that  the  system  was  somewhat 
simplistic as a measurement tool and too easily affected by 
a multitude of other factors that the driver had no control of. 
For  instance  many  perceived  that  there  were  “bad  buses”, 
typically older models with poor suspension (like the ‗DPS‘ 
Dennis  Plaxton  model)  that,  if  driven,  achieve  a  negative 
score: 

Jack: They also give you the scores for the buses, so you can 
see  that  certain  buses  are  not  good.  The  other  day  I  had  a 
DPS, which are not exactly the easiest. These are older buses. 
Ordinarily on a DPS forget it. There’s absolutely no point in 
worrying about it. 

Alan  articulates  a  similar  sentiment:  ―Yes,  the  suspensions 
vary  from  bus  to  bus.”  He  goes  on  to  explain  that  the 
management  team  were  generally  aware  of  this  and 
sympathetic  to  how  the  varying  nature  of  bus  suspension 
affects  drivers‘  scores.  For  this  reason,  scores  had  a  duel 
purpose—to  first  monitor  the  driver  and  second,  monitor 
the  mechanics  of  the  bus:  “If  a  bus  is  constantly  getting  low 
scores  with  every  driver  they  [the  management]  try  and  do 
something about it” (Alan). 

As  well  as  so-called  ―bad‖  buses,  drivers  also  argued  that 
some routes were inherently ―bad‖ and if assigned to them, 
they would be disadvantaged in their assessment: 

Jack: But then some routes are bad, and you will see that the 
drivers  on  those  routes  are  constantly  in  the  lower  range.  I 
don’t  think  they  take  too  much  notice  of  those,  because  they 
know that there’s nothing really they can do about it. 

Bob  summarizes  the  reasons  many  of  our  participants  feel 
that  Drivewell  is  a  poor  measurement  of  driving  quality: 
“most  of  the  time,  the  result  is  based  on  the  road  surface,  and 
crappy  buses.”  The  drivers  also  felt  that  there  was  a  clear 
flaw and irrationality in this measurement as a poor score or 
a  negative  event  might  actually  signal  good  driving.  This 
would  be  the  case  if  the  driver  had  to  brake  suddenly  to 
avoid  a  pedestrian  who  stumbles  onto  the  road:  “You  have 
reacted fast. To me, more than you have done worse, I think you 
have  done  well;  that’s  the  whole  concept”  (Bob).  Under  these 
the 
conditions, 
incentive  to  drive  well  for  some  drivers  as  through  being 
given  a  ―bad  bus‖  or  a  ―bad  route‖  or  even  through  safe 
driving they cannot fairly compete against their co-workers: 

the  reward  structure  doesn‘t  provide 

Interviewer:  So  those  people  would  never  have  a  chance  of 
winning the TV? 
Jack: Not a hope. 

These  findings  are  consistent  with  other  research  that  has 
shown  how  sensor  data  can  be  fragile  [11].  It  is  therefore 
important  to  attach  narratives  to  such  material  and  put  it 
into context [31]. 

A  further  issue  of  contention  was  the  ways  that  Drivewell 
generates  reports  that  ‗flag‘  those  employees  who  are 
potentially  driving  poorly  so  that  managers  can  intervene. 
At  this  stage,  drivers  are  interviewed  by  managers, 
following  which  a  human  form  of  surveillance—―the 
mystery  passenger‖—would  be  used  to  either  confirm  or 
contradict 
of  Drivewell.  However, 
disagreement  and  anecdotal  evidence  about  the  inaccuracy 
of  Drivewell  as  a  tool  to  measure  performance  meant  that 
many of our participants had crafted ready-made excuses in 
case  they  are  called  into  the  office  for  sanction.  For 
example,  Bob  explained  how  he  used  to  pay  attention  to 
Drivewell when driving but no longer did because he knew 
the system was flawed: 

findings 

the 

Bob:  I  know  that  if  I  get  called  in,  for  having  a  bad 
performance  on  that,  I  know  how  to  back  me  up…I’d  say, 
“Sort the bus out first, and sort the roads out, then I’ll make 

Sharing & Collaboration @ WorkCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1889sure  that  the  performance  will  be  100%,”.  They  can’t  catch 
me on that, definitely not. It doesn’t tell me anything; it’s just 
a waste of time and money.  

It was for these reasons that Bob felt that TfL should revert 
to the traditional method of human surveillance: 

Bob:  I  would  have  more  mystery  shoppers  [passengers], 
because that would give me a better result […] remember, you 
could give a perfect service, but you could be having a bit of 
attitude to passengers; that, to me, is a bad service. That key 
thing [Drivewell] won’t tell them that, but a human, at least if 
you’re a mystery traveller, he could be able to tell you that.  

Bob here alludes to what was previously the primary means 
of  assessing  the  driving  quality.  ―Mystery  passengers‖ 
would rate  aspects of the driving quality across a range of 
subjective  measures, but also be  assessing other aspects of 
their duties that are critical to providing passengers  with a 
good  service,  such  as  politeness.  Our  work  therefore 
contributes to recent literature that questions the privileging 
of data-performance in the management of a workforce [5]. 
However, the use of Drivewell to identify those drivers who 
should be assessed with a mystery passenger was seen as an 
inherent  failing  in  this  approach—an  issue  that  was 
compounded further as most drivers were able to recognize 
these ―mystery‖ shoppers. 

Resisting and subverting Drivewell 
Despite all of the drivers accommodating Drivewell in some 
way  into  their  work  life,  they  simultaneously  resisted  and 
rejected its coercive potential. This type of resistance took a 
range of forms. Jack characterised his initial reaction to the 
system  as  illustrative  of  his  “natural  anarchy”  and  what 
appeared 
to  his 
to  a  generally  disobedient  attitude 
relationship with management and performance monitoring: 
―I  went  through  a  period  of  seeing  how  much  red  I  could  get” 
(Jack). While Jack  was initially dismissive of the  system—
and  indeed  other  forms  of  management  control—he  did 
eventually  see  the  value  in  the  system.  Other  drivers 
displayed  less  overt  resistances,  instead  preferring  to 
modify  their  behaviour  just  enough  so  they  wouldn‘t  be 
liable  for  employer  sanction.  For  instance,  in  a  discussion 
with Erik and Justin, Erik started to explain how he would 
deliberately drive badly in order to reduce his overall score: 

Erik: As long as you keep it between 70 and 90, they won’t say 
nothing  to  you.  Nothing  at  all.  I  keep  mine  –  mine’s  literally 
the same every week. If I get into 100, when I’m running late, 
say I’m running from the garage to Peckham, all I keep doing 
is slamming the brakes on. 
Justin: Keep your score down. 
Erik: Yes. 
Justin: In case they expect you to get 100 every time? 
Erik: Yes, because if you stay in the 100s, then all of a sudden 
you  drop  down  to  the  80s,  they’ll  want  to  know  why.  They’ll 
start thinking, “Well, why’s he doing that? Why has that gone 
like that?” So if you keep it the same all the way through, like 
mine  is  always  between  86  and  94  per  cent,  and  so  I’ve  got 
amber. Every time I look on it, it’s amber all the way down. I 
won’t be in your green. 

Erik  regards  Drivewell  performance  measurement  as  more 
complex than just managing to keep his scores in the green 
or  amber  zones  on  a  given  route.  Instead,  he  looks  at  his 
scores over time and imagines the potential implications of 
him  suddenly  moving  from  very  good  to  poorer  (but  not 
necessarily bad) scores. Through reflecting on this, he takes 
the decision to act by ensuring his scores are always  “good 
enough”  so  as  to  avoid  sanctions  for  consistently  poor 
driving but also so as not to “raise expectations” that may not 
always  be  met.  Furthermore,  this  tactic  of  purposefully 
driving bad on limited occasions affords Erik the luxury of 
not modifying his driving at other times. 

to 

by 

attempting 

discover  ways 

We  also  observed  ways  that  employees  would  resist 
Drivewell 
to 
circumnavigate its use. As noted in the introduction, drivers 
are supplied with an individual key that they must plug into 
the  Drivewell  device  every  time  they  drive  a  bus.  Two 
drivers admitted to neglecting to activate the machine if no 
passengers  were  on-board.  This  would  typically  happen 
when they were leaving the garage at the start of their shift. 
There was a general feeling that this was not a significantly 
disobedient  practice  as  Drivewell  is  primarily  explained  to 
for  ensuring  passenger  comfort  and 
be  a  system 
satisfaction:  ―It  doesn't  matter  if  you  do  give  a  rough  ride,  it's 
only yourself. […] If you're the only one on the bus, what does it 
matter if you hit a few bumps or something? Like I say, if you take 
it  off,  it  should  make  a  noise  after  a  while.”  (Gordon).  By  not 
using the fob at the start of their shifts, the drivers are able 
to  creatively  carve  themselves  a  ‗gap‘  in  the  apparatus  of 
surveillance  and  resist 
the  continuous  extraction  of 
performance information. 

As well as removing their Drivewell keys at times when no 
passengers  were  on-board,  a  smaller  number  of  drivers 
discussed  how  it  was  possible  to  circumnavigate  it  while 
the  bus  was  in  service.  On  one  journey  that  the  researcher 
accompanied a participant on, it was demonstrated how the 
key could be removed for a short period of time before the 
alarm  started  to  become  audible.  This  period  of  time—
somewhere in the region of 10 to 15 seconds depending on 
the  bus—was  long  enough  to  disable  the  system,  restart  it 
and  stop  the  system  from  picking  up  on  a  potential  event. 
Gordon  explained  how  this  was  particularly  useful:  ―If  you 
see  a  big  pothole and  you  know you're  going  to hit  it,  you  could 
take  it  off  quickly.”  However,  Gordon  was  also  at  pains  to 
explain  how  he  would  not  do  this  regularly  in  practice 
himself:  “I  don't  think  that's  a  good  idea  because  you're  not 
concentrating so much on your driving when you’re doing things 
like that” (Gordon). 

Finally,  a  further  instance  of  subversion  was  witnessed 
during fieldwork at a bus depot. As noted above, there were 
occasions where multiple drivers would gather around their 
colleagues  as  they  were  using  the  Drivewell  kiosk  to 
receive a detailed breakdown of their driving report. During 
one  depot  visit,  drivers  gathered  around  the  terminal  and 
listened  intently  to  their  colleague  explain  what  was  being 
displayed on the screen. The  immediate response  from the 

Sharing & Collaboration @ WorkCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1890researcher  was  that  this  driver  must  have  received  some 
extraordinary  Drivewell  scores.  However,  upon  further 
investigation  it  was  revealed  that  this  driver  was  showing 
his colleagues where his holiday home in Spain was: “That 
machine is quite useful. One of the drivers, who bought a house in 
a  village  in  Southern  Spain,  was  able  to  get  that  up  on  the 
machine  and  show  exactly  where  the  house  he  bought  was” 
(Jack).  This  illustrates  how  drivers  have,  even  in  a  small 
way,  the  ability  to  creatively  reshape  Drivewell  and  use  it 
on their own terms. 

Managing multiple forms of performance monitoring 
Our  final  theme  relates  to  the  ways  that  Drivewell  was 
considered  an  additional  complication  to  our  participants‘ 
already  challenging  job  of  bus  driving.  In  some  ways  the 
Drivewell  unit  was  considered  a  literal  distraction  in  a 
driver‘s cabin.  Pat  spoke at length about the  ways in  which 
he found the system distracting, both within the cabin and as 
a  way  of  focusing  the  driver  too  much  on  getting  good 
scores:  

Pat:  In  my  eyes,  the  problem  is  it  comes  up  on  a  traffic-light 
system above you. You can be distracted from driving because 
you’re so concerned at getting a good score. […] When it was 
first  introduced,  a  lot  of  people  were  so  concerned  because, 
obviously,  you’re  distracted.  You’re  not  looking  at  the  road  if 
you’re looking up there. 

In many respects, Drivewell could be considered as a further 
addition to what is a complex job requiring great amounts of 
concentration. The complexity of the role was in many ways 
illustrated—yet also compounded—by the increasing  modes 
of  measuring  driver  performance.  While  our  fieldwork  was 
focused  on  the  impact  of  the  Drivewell  system,  very  often 
participants  talked  about  it  in  contrast,  or  alongside,  these 
other  ways  their  work  is  being  monitored  and  judged.  For 
instance,  CCTV  is  used  to  add  additional  security  to 
passengers  but  was  also  known  to  be  a  way  of  checking 
driver behaviour and action in the case of a complaint or road 
traffic  incident.  The  iBus  terminal—a  GPS  enabled  system 
that  visually  displays  distances  between  buses  in  front  and 
behind  on  the  same  route  (discussed  in  [30])—is  a  way  of 
ensuring regular intervals between buses but is also a tool for 
real-time  assessment  of  driver  punctuality.  In  one  joint 
interview  with  Nobby  and  Jack,  there  was  a  strong  feeling 
that all aspects of their work life will soon be monitored: “it 
knows  your  speed  […]  they  know  everything”  (Jack);  “they  know 
exactly”;  “you’ve  got  cameras,  what  speed  you’re  doing,  if  you 
accelerate  too  fast  […]  You’ve  got  undercover,  it’s  just  endless” 
(Nobby).  The  endlessness  that  Nobby  here  describes  was 
demonstrated frequently to us as we accompanied drivers on 
journeys around London. After a limited amount of fieldwork 
we quickly noticed how many drivers are prone to glance at 
the iBus LCD and the Drivewell indicator almost as much as 
they check their wing mirrors.  

We  also  observed 
the  qualitative  difference  between 
Drivewell  and  other  apparatus  of  surveillance  present  on 
London buses and the different ways drivers respond to them. 
Like  iBus  headway,  Drivewell  supplies  immediate  visual 

feedback. However, if headway performance is poor there are 
extra  prods  via  text  message  and  then  a  radio  call,  and  so 
more importance is placed upon adhering to the demands of 
this apparatus of surveillance. The ―mystery passenger‖ as a 
type  of  surveillance  is  also  experienced  differently,  as 
described in the following quote by Jack. It is less immediate 
and doesn‘t require a reflexive response, rather it adheres to 
Foucault‘s  metaphorical  use  of  panopticon  when  explaining 
modern  forms  of  surveillance  –  a  design  that  facilitates  the 
discipline of subordinates because it is impossible for them to 
know when they are being watched [16]..  

Jack: Oh, you get them regularly anyway. You will suddenly get a 
letter saying, “You were assessed the other day.” They don’t use 
our own staff very often, because- 

Nobby: We know them. 

Jack: You see somebody get on, and you see where they're going 
to sit, and from then on it’s absolutely mirrors, mirrors.  

Nobby: Put away your sandwich. (Laughter)  

Jack: Yes. Wait until they all sit down. 

It  was  also  apparent  that  it  wasn‘t  just  the  functional 
operation  of  duties  in  relation  to  these  different  forms  of 
monitoring  that  was  challenging,  but  also  that  sometimes 
trade-offs  had  to  be  made  in  prioritising  certain  measures 
over  others.  For  example,  Nobby  explained  how  he  was 
“caught out” one time when his score was adversely affected 
after he had to leave the bus garage late: 

Nobby:  Work  informed  me  that  I  left  late,  and  so  obviously  my 
driving was rather erratic. Basically I was driving it like a rally 
driver from Tottenham to – basically I left about 12 minutes late 
and given about 50 minutes to do it. So basically when I finished I 
realised,  or  when  I  put  my  score  in,  it  was  down  to  60,  and 
therefore  I  realised  it  was  the  way  I  was  driving,  because  of 
obviously  the  braking  and  the  acceleration.  So  I  went  from 
average 80 down to 60.  

On this occasion, Nobby acknowledged he had driven his bus 
“like  a  rally  driver”  in  order  to  make  up  time  and  not  be 
reprimanded  for  causing  delays 
to  services  and  not 
maintaining  equal  distances  between  services.  However,  he 
realised  on  reflection  that  in  doing  so  he  had  significantly 
impacted  on  his  Drivewell  score.  He  acknowledged  on 
reflection that he may think twice about trying to catch up to 
schedule like this in the future. In a similar example, Gordon 
explained  how  when  it  came  to  managing  both  Drivewell 
(monitoring of acceleration, speed and horizontal movement 
of the bus) and Headway (keeping a designated gap between 
the buses in front and behind on the same route) he aimed to 
keep both in balance with one-another: “It's getting the happy 
medium, isn't it? Keep the bus on time, but give a reasonable ride. I 
try  and  get  that  balance  about  right.  If  it's  too  comfortable  you 
might  be  going  too  slowly.”  (Gordon).  After  being  pressed 
further  on  this  point,  however,  Gordon  explained  how 
maintaining headway would be prioritised over the quality of 
his driving:  

Sharing & Collaboration @ WorkCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1891Gordon: I don't like the bus in front to get too far away. If it gets a 
little  bit  ahead,  especially  if  it's  a  fast  bus  driver,  we  can  get 
further ahead. So you've got a wider headway, plus you can start 
and  get  later  and  later  and  later  because  you're  picking  up 
passengers who would have missed your bus had you been further 
down the road. I like to keep closer to the one in front. It makes it 
easy. You can't get too close because otherwise they will call you 
up.  The  controllers  will  call  you  up  and  say,  "Hold  back  two 
minutes.  Hold  back  three  minutes"  or  whatever.  I'd  rather  just 
have  it  so  that  I  can  just  get  away  with  it  without  any  of  them 
having to say anything to me. 

Gordon reflects on the ways in which he has to negotiate the 
different forms of surveillance and the ways in which it may 
impact on his immediate work. He is aware that if he drives 
too close to the bus ahead of his then he will likely get some 
“grief” from the controller on his Headway system. This may 
mean being asked to wait for a short period to build the gap 
up further or receive further “hassle” from his controller and 
potential disciplinary action. The implication here, however, 
is  that  by  slowing  down  the  likelihood  of  picking  up  more 
passengers  increases  and  thus  the  bus  becomes  delayed  and 
becomes too close to one that may be following behind. This 
would mean having to increase the speed of the bus in order 
to maintain a distance to the one behind—which, of course, 
would likely mean more aggressive driving and acceleration, 
impacting  on  Drivewell  scores.  Therefore,  by  carefully 
managing  his  Headway  all  the  time,  Gordon  considers 
himself  better  placed  to  keep  his  ideal  “middle  ground” 
between good Headway and Drivewell scores. 

DISCUSSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
Our  fieldwork  has  highlighted  the  ways  telematics  systems 
like  Drivewell  can  impact  a  remote  and  mobile  workforce. 
The  device  undoubtedly  has  some  positive  impacts,  seen 
most  clearly  in  the  way  it  affords  real-time  feedback  and 
opportunities  for  reflection  on  driving  practice.  However, 
there are wider questions about the validity and accuracy of 
the  data  collected  by  Drivewell,  which  was  indicative  of 
broader concerns about digital surveillance. We discuss these 
issues below in three interrelated themes: first we explore the 
ways Drivewell carries assumptions about the nature of good 
driving  and  ask  whether  these  assumptions  reflect  the 
drivers‘  own  understanding  of  best  practice;  second,  we 
consider  Drivewell  as  one  element 
in  a  complex 
technological  ecosystem,  asking  how  well  the  complexities 
of driving can best be captured by this integrated telematics 
platform and exploring the extent to which the systems set up 
competing  demands  for  the  driver;  third,  we  ask  whether 
driver  surveillance  techniques  can  be  integrated  into  an 
effective  driver  appraisal  and  reward  system  that  could 
ultimately improve performance.  

What does it mean to drive well? 
Drivewell  is  associated  with  a  number  of  claims,  with 
published  benefits  including  improved  passenger  comfort 
and  better  fuel  efficiency.  However  Drivewell  does  not 
directly measure these outcomes, but instead offers a simple 
proxy measure that can then become a target in its own right. 
We  have  seen  that  drivers  can  develop  quite  elaborate 

strategies  to  maintain  their  Drivewell  score,  but  we  should 
ask  to  what  extent  these  strategies  ultimately  serve  the 
company, the passengers and the drivers. 

We have evidence that some drivers have used the system as 
a learning tool, using the scores to reflect on their driving and 
consider  areas  for  improvement.  These  drivers  maintain  a 
more  nuanced  view  of  their  role  and  responsibilities.  They 
are  likely  to  balance  the  demands  of  Drivewell  with  other 
work  demands  and  in  the  process  are  likely  to  acquire  new 
skills  and  knowledge  that  could  genuinely  lead  to  better 
driving.  However,  the  score  can  become  an  end  in  itself—
leading either to a race  to the top,  when drivers compete  to 
get the best score, or a race to mediocrity, when drivers try to 
establish  a  readily  achievable  baseline  score  and  stick  to  it. 
Under either circumstance, the score becomes the target and 
there  is  a  real  danger  that  genuinely  good  driving—like 
keeping  a  safe  distance  from  the  vehicle  in  front,  gets  lost 
along  the  way.  This  implication  is  consistent  with  other 
research that has highlighted the potential of sensor data to be 
insubstantial in the accurate measurement of an activity [11] 
and  other  work  that  has  demonstrated  the  importance  of 
attaching narratives to such data [31]. 

How to drive a London bus  
The act of driving a London bus is quite unlike other forms 
of non-commercial driving, in large part because of a range 
of technological innovations that have been introduced in the 
last few years. Drivewell operates as part of a technological 
ecosystem  where  different  devices  monitor 
specific 
information in relation to driving style (Drivewell), location, 
speed  and  relationship  to  other  buses  (iBus),  passenger 
behaviour (CCTV) and general conduct (mystery passenger). 
In short, the London Bus is now imbued with an intelligence 
and ability to communicate with other buses, with passengers 
and  controllers  in  a  way  that  anticipates  the  seamless 
communication of smart objects in the Internet of Things and 
the eventual roll out of driverless vehicles. There is one very 
important  difference,  however.  In  this  system,  the  human 
driver  is  still  in  complete  control  of  the  bus.  If  the  array  of 
on-board  devices  will  ultimately  serve  to  reduce 
the 
autonomy of the driver, then two questions should be raised. 
First, do the different devices work collaborate to support the 
driver  or  do  they  compete  for  valuable  attention  and  set  up 
competing  priorities?  Second,  do  these  systems  lead  to 
accurate and effective performance management? 

In  answer  to  the  first  question,  we  found  that  the  different 
systems can compete in unhelpful ways. Driving well, being 
sensitive to local conditions and to the needs of passengers is 
not  necessarily  compatible  with  driving  in  a  way  that 
maintains headway between buses [30] or that keeps the bus 
on schedule. As we have already noted, on-board devices can 
place additional demands on the driver‘s attention, adding to 
the  range  of  ‗multiple  additional  to  driving‘  distractors  that 
are  becoming  commonplace  [21].  As  such,  if  monitoring 
systems are to exist, they should be implemented in ways that 

Sharing & Collaboration @ WorkCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1892do not immediately impact on bus drivers‘ attention and the 
way work is assessed. 

In  answer  to  the  second  question,  we  need  to  return  to  the 
organisational  literature  on  performance  monitoring  and 
appraisal  in  order  to  ask  whether  telematics  are  likely  to 
improve  worker  behaviour,  organisational  culture  and 
management  practice.  We  know  that  any  surveillance  or 
monitoring  system  should  be  designed  to  appropriately  and 
accurately  assess  performance  on  a  particular  task.  We  also 
know  that  the  best  performance  monitoring  systems  respect 
the psychological and emotional elements of a job—such that 
performance scores are not considered alone [34; 26; 10; 22; 
7]. Given the various aforementioned stressors on those who 
choose  bus  driving  as  an  occupation,  there  is  a  danger  that 
Drivewell fails on both counts. As we have seen, drivers have 
challenged  its  accuracy,  feel  that  they  don‘t  capture  good 
driving in its fullest sense and fail to account for the quality 
of  the  vehicle  being  driven  and  the  nature  of  the  roads 
travelled.  In  terms  of  the  integration  of  this  system  into  the 
wider  organisation  we  also  encounter  a  perception  that  the 
technology  is  deployed  to  benefit  the  employer  at  the 
expense  of  employees.  In  short,  we  don‘t  see  much 
recognition of the known stressors already acting on the bus 
driver,  nor  much  consideration  of  how  new  surveillance 
might add to those stressors.   

Resistance in a mobile and remote workplace 
Marx famously described the ways workplace surveillance is 
used  as  a  tool  to  maintain  managerial  control  on  behalf  of 
capital. The architecture of a factory renders workers highly 
visible  and  therefore  controllable  by  their  supervisors. 
Workers‘ resistances to coercion in these spaces consisted of 
literally  throwing  a  spanner  in  the  works  to  halt  production 
lines  and 
like 
unionization.  We  see  this  in  the  modern  workplace,  where 
research  on  call  centre  workers  has  shown  that  intense 
surveillance generates acts of worker resistance, sabotage and 
non-compliance with managers [17; 9].  

forms  of  work  solidarity 

traditional 

the 

to  discount 

For  decades,  the  driver  workplace  offered  few  points  of 
comparison  with  the  factory  or  call-centre  context—they 
worked  alone  (or  in  pairs)  in  a  remote  and  mobile  context 
where performance monitoring was ad hoc and subjective. So 
what does the implementation of digital surveillance mean in 
terms of  worker resistance? We have seen the various ways 
legitimacy  of 
that  drivers  are  able 
Drivewell—questioning  its  accuracy  or  appropriateness.  We 
have also seen a number of resistances that include removing 
the fob for short periods in order to reduce recorded ‗events‘, 
purposefully  performing  poorly 
reduce 
expectation  and  challenging  managers‘  interpretation  of 
scores by blaming vehicles and the road. In part, this would 
seem to be a reflection of the simplicity of the performance 
measure and it would be interesting to consider the ways the 
drivers  themselves  might  be  able  to  present  their  own 
‗scores‘ as part of a more sophisticated package of evidence 
in  support  of  skills.  It  is  interesting,  in  this  regard,  that  the 

in  order 

to 

drivers  themselves  have  adopted  the  practice  of  using 
Drivewell in their own evidence-gathering efforts to illustrate 
problems  with  a  particular  bus  or  route  and  fostering  this 
kind of agency might be a more acceptable way to go. 

CONCLUSION 
In this paper we have studied Drivewell, a telematics device 
installed  by  London‘s  transport  authority  on  their  buses  to 
measure  and  regulate  driving.  This  is  an  example  of  an 
increasing  range  of  driver-surveillance  technologies  on 
London‘s  buses.  Although  drivers  did  see  some  value  in 
these  systems,  they  have  also  caused  anxiety  and  there  is 
deep suspicion about this technology‘s efficacy and accuracy. 
Our  findings  highlighted a range of resistances drivers  have 
developed to compensate for and work-around the Drivewell 
system. We also saw how drivers have to negotiate between 
the  demands  of  Drivewell  and  other  monitoring  systems, 
some  of  which  are  based  on  competing  and  contradictory 
forms of assessment. While these issues emphasise the deep 
challenges  to  accepting  such  monitoring  technologies  in 
remote and mobile workplaces, we suggest there are positive 
opportunities  here  to  harness  the  learning  potential  around 
sensor data and to support the development of skills and self-
advocacy in the workplace. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This  work  was  supported  by  RCUK  Digital  Economy 
Program grant no. EP/G066019/1 SiDE. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Ball, K. Workplace surveillance: an overview. Labor 

History, 51, 1 (2010): 87-106. 

2.  Beniger, J. The Control Revolution: Technological and 

Economic Origins of the Information Society. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1986 
3.  Biernacki, P. and Waldorf, D. Snowball sampling: 

problems and techniques of chain referral sampling. 
Sociological Methods & Research, 10, 2 (1981), 141-
163. 

4.  Bolderdijk, J., Knockaert, J., Steg, E. and Verhoef, E. 
Effects of Pay-As-You-Drive vehicle insurance on 
young drivers‘ speed choice: Results of a Dutch field 
experiment. Accident Analysis & Prevention, 43, 3 
(2011), 1181-1186. 

5.  Bouskila-Yam, O. and Kluger, A. Strength-based 
performance appraisal and goal setting. Human 
Resource Management Review, 21, 2 (2011), 137-147. 

6.  Brewer, J. D. Ethnography. Philadelphia: Open 

University Press, 2000.  

7.  Brewer, N. and Ridgeway, T. Effects of supervisory 

monitoring on productivity and quality of performance. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Applied, 4 (1998): 
211–27. 

8.  Brown, I. D. Driver fatigue. Human Factors, 36 (1994), 

298–314. 

Sharing & Collaboration @ WorkCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1893 
9.  Callaghan, G. and Thompson, P. We recruit attitude: the 
selection and shaping of routine call centre labour. 
Journal of Management Studies, 39, 2 (2002), 233–54. 

25. Mulders, H., Meijman, T., O'Hanlon, J. and Mulder, B. 
Differential psychophysiological reactivity of city bus 
drivers. Ergonomics, 25 (1982), 1003-1011. 

10. Chalykoff, J. and Kochan, T. Computer-aided 

monitoring: its influence on employee job satisfaction 
and turnover. Personnel Psychology, 42 (1989), 807–29. 
11. Choe, E., Lee, N., Lee, B., Pratt, W. and Kientz, J. 2014. 
Understanding quantified-selfers' practices in collecting 
and exploring personal data. In Proc. CHI ’14, ACM, 
1143-1152.  

12. Desyllas, P., and Sako, M. (2013). Profiting from 

business model innovation: Evidence from Pay-As-You-
Drive auto insurance. Research Policy, 42(1), 101-116. 
13. Duffy, C. and McGoldrick, A. Stress and the bus driver 

in the UK transport industry. Work and Stress, 4, 
(1990), 17-27.  

14. Duri, S., Gruteser, M., Liu, X., Moskowitz, P. Perez, R., 
Singh, M. and Tang, J. Framework for security and 
privacy in automotive telematics. In Proc. 2nd 
International Workshop on Mobile Commerce, ACM 
Press (2002), 25-32.   

15. Fayol, H. General and Industrial Management. London: 

Sir Issac Pitman, 1916.  

16. Foucault, M. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the 

Prison. New York: Vintage Books, 1995. 

17. Frenkel, S., Tam, M., Korczynski, M. and Shire, K. 

Beyond bureaucracy? Work organization in call centres. 
International Journal of Human Resource Management, 
9, 6 (1998), 957–79. 

18. Goyal, M. Insurance telematics. International Journal of 
Innovative Research and Development, 3, 6 (2014), 72-
76.  

19. Iqbal, M. and Lim, S. A privacy preserving GPS-based 

Pay-as-You-Drive insurance scheme. In Proc. 
Symposium on GPS/GNSS (2006), 17-21. 

20. Iqbal, M. and Lim, S. (2010). Privacy implications of 

automated GPS tracking and profiling. Technology and 
Society Magazine, IEEE, 29, 2 (2010), 39-46. 
21. Lansdown, T., Stephens, A. and Walker, G. (2014). 
Multiple driver distractions: a systemic transport 
problem. Accident Analysis & Prevention, in press, 
available online, July 2014. 

22. Larson, J. and Callahan, C. Performance monitoring: 
how it affects work productivity. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 75 (1990), 530–38. 

23. Litman, T., 2005. Pay-As-You-Drive vehicle insurance: 
converting vehicle insurance premiums into use-based 
charges. http://www.vtpi.org/tdm/tdm79.htm on the 
23rd of June 2014. 

24. Morris, J., Heady, J., Raffle, P., Roberts, A., and Parks, 
J. Coronary heart-disease and physical activity of work. 
The Lancet, 2 (1953), 1053–1057. 

26. Niehoff, B., and Moorman, R. Justice as a mediator of 
the relationship between methods of monitoring and 
organizational citizenship behaviour. Academy of 
Management Journal, 36 (1993), 527–56. 

27. Papadimitratos, P., de La Fortelle, A., Evenssen, K., 
Brignolo, R. and Cosenza, S. (2009) Vehicular 
communication systems: enabling technologies, 
applications, and future outlook on intelligent 
transportation. IEEE Communications Magazine, 
November (2009), 84-95. 

28. Parry, I. (2005) Is Pay-as-You-Drive insurance a better 
way to reduce gasoline than gasoline taxes?. American 
Economic Review, 288-293. 

29. Pritchard, G., Vines, J. and Olivier, P. Your money‘s no 
good here: The elimination of cash payment on London 
buses. In Proc. CHI ’15, ACM, to appear. 

30. Pritchard, G., Vines, J., Briggs, P., Thomas, L. and 

Olivier, P. Digitally driven: how location based services 
impact on the work practices of London bus drivers. In 
Proc. CHI ’14, ACM, 3617-3626. 

31. Rooksby, J., Rost, M., Morrison, A. and Chalmers, M. 

Personal tracking as lived informatics. In Proc. CHI ’14, 
ACM, 1162-1172. 

32. Rosengren, A., Anderson, K., and Wilhelmsen, L. Risk 
of coronary heart disease in middle-aged male bus and 
tram drivers compared to men in other occupations: a 
prospective study. International Journal of 
Epidemiology, 20 (1991), 82–87. 

33. Şimşek, B., Pakdil, F., Dengiz, B., and Testik, M. 
Driver performance appraisal using GPS terminal 
measurements: a conceptual framework. Transportation 
Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 26 (2013), 
49-60. 

34. Stanton, J., and Barnes-Farrell, J. Effects of electronic 

performance monitoring on personal control, 
satisfaction and performance. Journal of Applied 
Psychology, 81 (1996), 738–45. 

35. Tse, J., Flin, M. and Mearns, K. (2006) Bus driver well-
being review: 50 years of research. Transportation 
Research Part F, 9 (2006), 89-114 

36. Whyte,  W.  Street  Corner  Society.  Chicago:  University 

of Chicago Press, 1943. 

37. Winkleby,  M.,  Ragland,  D.,  Fisher,  J.  and  Syme,  S. 
(1988)  Excess  risk  of  sickness  and  disease  in  bus 
drivers. International Journal of Epidemiology, 17, 255-
262. 

Sharing & Collaboration @ WorkCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea1894 
 
 
