"It's Definitely Been a Journey": A Qualitative Study on 
How Women with Eating Disorders Use Weight Loss Apps 

Elizabeth V. Eikey 
The Pennsylvania State University 
University Park, PA USA 
eveikey@psu.edu 

Madhu C. Reddy 
Northwestern University 
 Evanston, IL USA 
mreddy@northwestern.edu 

influence  on  users.  From 

ABSTRACT 
Technology is often viewed as either positive or negative. On 
one  hand,  in  HCI,  weight  loss  apps  are  usually  seen  as  a 
positive 
the  sociocultural 
perspective,  on  the  other  hand,  media  and  technology 
negatively impact body satisfaction and contribute to eating 
disorders; however, these studies fail to include weight loss 
apps. While these apps can be beneficial to users, they can 
also  have  negative  effects  on  users  with  eating  disorder 
behaviors.  Yet  few  research  studies  have  looked  at  weight 
loss apps in relation to eating disorders. In order to fill this 
gap, we conducted interviews with 16 women with a history 
of eating disorders who use(d) weight loss apps. While our 
findings suggest these apps can contribute to and exacerbate 
eating disorder behaviors, they also reveal a more complex 
picture of app usage. Women’s use and perceptions of weight 
loss apps shift as they experience life and move to and from 
stages of change. This research troubles the binary view of 
technology  and  emphasizes  the  importance  of  looking  at 
technology use as a dynamic process. Our study contributes 
to our understanding of weight loss app design. 

Author Keywords 
Weight  loss  apps;  mobile  applications;  eating  disorders; 
anorexia  nervosa;  bulimia  nervosa;  qualitative;  persuasive; 
food journal; self-tracking; quantified self 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous 

INTRODUCTION 
Many  young  women  use  mobile  health  applications  for 
weight loss (weight loss apps). As of January 2014, 51.7% 
of the 46 million people who used apps from the health and 
fitness category were women [52]. According to Neilson, the 
most popular health app during this time was MyFitnessPal, 
an  app  that  allows  users  to  track  calories,  exercise,  and 
weight, with 8.7 million users [52]. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2017, May 06-11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA  
© 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4655-9/17/05…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025591. 

Women’s  motivation  for  using  these  apps  is  often  to  lose 
weight even if they are technically at a healthy weight [51]. 
With the pressure to be thin and beautiful, some women have 
an unrealistic and distorted view of their bodies. In fact, in 
North America, there is such a pervasive body dissatisfaction 
and  preoccupation  with  weight  that  psychologists  have 
developed the term “normative discontent”, which describes 
the  “normalcy”  of  being  unhappy  with  one’s  weight  as  a 
woman [39].  

the 

sociocultural  perspective,  much  of 

this 
From 
dissatisfaction  is  driven  by  the  media  and  now  technology 
[39]. The sociocultural model of eating disorders posits that 
“disordered eating is a result of internalizing the increasing 
pressures for women in Western society to achieve an ultra-
slender  figure/the  thin  ideal,  which  current  cultural  trends 
emphasize  as  an  essential  component  of  beauty”  (p.1225) 
[18]. With this obsession with weight and size, women may 
engage in extreme and even dangerous behaviors to achieve 
an unattainable idea of beauty – even when losing weight is 
unnecessary. Some of these women develop eating disorders 
as a result. In fact, it is estimated that 35% of “typical dieters” 
develop  eating  disorder  behaviors,  and  of  those,  20-25% 
develop partial or full eating disorders [37]. 

Few  research  studies  have  looked  at  weight  loss  apps  as  a 
type  of  new  media  that  may  contribute  to  or  exacerbate 
eating disorders. Yet weight loss apps often contain the same 
types of content as other technologies that have been shown 
to  worsen  body  dissatisfaction  and  disordered  eating.  In 
Human-Computer  Interaction  (HCI),  weight  loss  apps  are 
often  viewed  as  positive  influence  on  users.  In  order  to 
understand if weight loss apps contribute to eating disorders, 
we  wanted  to  hear  stories  from  women  with  a  history  of 
eating disorders who use or have used weight loss apps. We 
used semi-structured interviews with 16 participants in order 
to get in depth and detailed descriptions of their experiences. 
One  primary  research  question  guided  our  study:  How  do 
women  with  a  history  of  eating  disorders  use  weight  loss 
apps? 

What  emerged  from  this  data  is  a  complex  perspective  of 
how weight  loss  apps  are used. While  there  is  evidence  to 
suggest that weight loss apps, like other technologies, may 
contribute to and exacerbate eating disorder behaviors, how 
these  apps  are  used  and  users’  perceptions  of  these  apps 
change over time. This finding “troubles” the typical binary 
view of technology. That is, instead of technology being seen 
as only positive or negative, the role of technology can shift 

Self-tracking Mental HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA642 
depending on where users are in their health “journey”. This 
should be of growing interest to the HCI community because 
viewing technology as just good or bad neglects the larger 
picture  of  how  technology  use  changes  depending  on  user 
needs.  Specifically,  our  study  shows  women  with  eating 
disorders  reflect  on  and  use  apps  differently  as  they  go 
through  their  eating  disorder  journey.  Our  research  has 
implications for the design of more health-focused apps. 

BACKGROUND 
Eating Disorders 
While  it  is  estimated  that  20  million  women  in  the  United 
States  have  an  eating disorder,  many  more have  unhealthy 
eating  behaviors  or  may  be  undiagnosed  [33,48].  It  is 
estimated  that  8%-17%  of  college-aged  students  have  an 
eating  disorder,  and  20%  of  college  students  believe  they 
have had an eating disorder in their lifetime [14,21,34].  

For  the  purposes  of  our  study,  we  focused  on  behaviors 
associated  with  anorexia  and  bulimia  nervosa  and  other 
specified  eating  disorder/eating  disorder  not  otherwise 
specified  because  there  is  some  overlap  between  these 
disorders  [1].  Eating  disorder  behaviors  related  to  these 
disorders  include  excessive  calorie  or  food  restriction, 
intense  fear  of  gaining  weight,  obsession  with  weight  and 
consistent  behavior  to  prevent  weight  gain,  self-esteem 
overly related to body image, bingeing, feeling of being out 
of  control  during  bingeing,  purging,  dramatic  weight  loss, 
preoccupation  with  weight,  food,  calories,  fat  grams,  and 
dieting, refusal to eat certain foods, comments about feeling 
“fat”,  hunger  denial,  excessive  exercise  regimen,  and 
development of food rituals. 

Some eating disorder behaviors may be viewed as typical to 
achieve weight loss or not severe enough to warrant medical 
attention. Research has shown that even women of a healthy 
weight  may  utilize  “weight  loss  methods”  indicative  of 
eating disorders [33]. Additionally, research has shown that 
25% of college women in the United States have engaged in 
bingeing and purging as a weight loss method [48]. 

Sociocultural Perspective of Eating Disorders 
While biological and psychological factors play a role in an 
individual’s  predisposition  and  development  of  eating 
disorders  [12],  researchers  in  psychology  have  highlighted 
the sociocultural perspective - that social and cultural factors 
play a significant role in the development and prevalence of 
eating disorders [3]. This perspective is used to understand 
how  social  and  cultural  factors,  such  as  traditional  media, 
affect an individual’s mental processes and behaviors [36]. 
For  example,  it  has  been  used  to understand  the  impact  of 
media  on  body  image  and  eating  behaviors  [3].  For  quite 
some  time,  research  has  shown  that  media  exposure 
contributes  to  body  dissatisfaction  and  disordered  eating 
[31].  However,  much  of  this  research  has  focused  on 
conventional mass media, such as magazines and television.  

In recent years, researchers have been calling for more work 
in  understanding  the  impact  of  new  media,  such  as  online 

content, on the thin ideal, body image, and eating disorder 
symptomology  [31].  From  this  perspective,  technology  is 
viewed  as  a  negative  influence  on  users.  Recent  work  has 
shown that online content, such as social media, is associated 
with poor body image and eating disorders, especially among 
women [2,16,24,26,42]. Many online weight loss and fitness 
communities  either  overtly  or  subtly  promote  eating 
disorders, and this negatively affects users who are trying to 
address their eating disorder issues [41,45]. Researchers in 
psychology 
of 
understanding  the  effects  of  new  media  on  eating  disorder 
symptomology.  

importance 

recognized 

have 

the 

However, their focus has largely been on social media. For 
example,  using  Facebook  is  correlated  with  drive  for 
thinness  in  women  and  men  [23]  and  body  dissatisfaction 
[16,17,42].  Mabe  et  al.  [24]  found  that  frequency  of 
Facebook  use  was  related  to  disordered  eating.  Similarly, 
Stronge et al. [42] found women and men of all ages are more 
likely to have poorer body satisfaction if they use Facebook. 
Kim and Chock [23] conducted an online survey to examine 
Facebook’s  impact  on  users’  body  image  attitudes.  While 
they did not find a correlation between time spent on social 
media  and  body  image  concerns,  they  found  engaging  in 
particular social media behaviors such as checking friends’ 
profiles,  leaving  messages,  and  commenting  on  profiles  is 
correlated  with  a  drive  for  thinness  in  both  females  and 
males.  

Even  HCI  researchers  who  study  eating  disorders  have 
primarily  focused  on  social  media  [7,13,30].  Some 
researchers  have  found  that  social  media  promotes  eating 
disorder behaviors. For example, Chancellor et al. [7] found 
that  despite  Instagram’s  strategies  to  reduce  pro-eating 
disorder content, pro-eating disorder communities still exist 
and  are  thriving.  Similarly,  Pater  et  al.  [30]  analyzed 
hashtags on Tumblr, Instagram, and Twitter and found pro-
eating disorder-related hashtags, images, and text. While this 
work  is  important  because  many  people  (especially  young 
females) use social media, research is lacking on the role of 
weight  loss  apps.  Additionally,  this  perspective  only 
considers  media  and  technology  as  a  negative  influence; 
whereas our study looks at weight loss apps as both positive 
and negative. 

Health Apps for Weight Loss, Diet, and Exercise 
We  add  to  the  HCI  literature  on  food  journaling,  self-
tracking,  weight  loss  and  persuasive  technology.  In  HCI, 
many researchers focus on how weight loss apps are positive 
influences on users. Specifically, weight loss technology is 
often  seen  as  a  way  to  help  people  combat  obesity  and 
obesity-related  health  conditions.  Thus,  the  focus  is  on 
designing  apps  to  motivate  users  to  eat  less  or  healthier, 
exercise  more, 
long-term 
use 
[4,6,9,10,20,22,27,35,40,46,47,49] and how this technology 
contributes to users’ ability or their perception of their ability 
to achieve health goals, such as weight loss and exercising 
[8,28].  

and 

app 

the 

Self-tracking Mental HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA643These apps can be useful weight loss tools [19,38], but they 
may also trigger unhealthy eating and exercise behaviors by 
creating a dependence on logging food, exercise, and weight. 
Tan et al. [44] found that users felt weight loss and fitness 
apps could be both helpful and harmful for eating disorder 
recovery but did not elaborate further. Prior to weight loss 
apps,  some  people  (including  those  with  eating  disorders) 
tracked their diet and exercise on paper. While this can still 
negatively  impact  eating  disorder  behaviors,  weight  loss 
apps are more personalized, discreet, mobile, and quicker to 
use. They also provide users with precise values for food and 
exercise  and  visualizations  of  weight  loss  and  calories 
consumed/burned  with  an  added  component  of  the  app 
“rewarding” them for eating less, exercising more, and losing 
weight. 

Recently, some HCI researchers have been challenging the 
narrative  that  quantifying  behaviors  and  logging  is  always 
positive  or  appropriate.  For  example,  Cordeiro  et  al.  [11] 
considered  the  use  and  problematic  aspects  of  food 
journaling  for  a  general  population,  where  the  focus  is  to 
encourage logging. Similarly, Cordeiro et al. [10] discussed 
how in self-tracking, quantifying behaviors are pervasive but 
not always appropriate because of user goals. Purpura et al.’s 
[32]  fictional  Fit4Life  is  related  to  our  work  because  they 
discussed problems of persuasive technology. They call for 
us to expand our criteria beyond BMI because it is not a good 
measure of health and explore unintended consequences.  

Our study directly contributes to prior HCI work. Like other 
researchers, we also believe the quantification of behaviors 
is not always appropriate but investigate the use of existing 
self-tracking  tools  to  understand  how  users’  needs  are  not 
being  met.  Our  study  looks  at  the  issues  of  weight  loss 
technologies and unintended consequences but in the context 
of eating disorders. 

METHODS 
Participants and Recruitment 
To be eligible for the study, participants (1) Had to use/have 
used weight loss apps, (2) Be an 18-25 year old woman, and 
(3)  Have/had  an  eating  disorder  (symptoms  related  to 
anorexia and/or bulimia nervosa). Although eating disorders 
are  increasing  among  men  [43],  we  focused  on  women 
because they are more likely to develop eating disorders [15]. 
Because  some  people  do  not  meet  the  full  criteria  for  a 
specific  diagnosis  and  because  many  people  never  seek 
treatment  for  their  eating  disorder,  we  recruited  both 
participants  who  were  formally  diagnosed  and  those  who 
were  not.  We  posted  flyers  at  the  university  and  at  public 
locations  around  the  local  town.  Each  participant  was 
compensated $25.  

Data Collection Sessions 
The first author conducted all data collection sessions. Each 
session consisted of a survey, a think-aloud exercise, and a 
semi-structured interview. Through the survey, we obtained 
demographic  information  as  well  as  history  and  status  of 
their eating disorders. For the think-aloud exercise, we asked 

participants  to  go  through  3  tasks:  (1)  setting  goals,  (2) 
viewing  progress  visualizations,  and  (3)  using  social  and 
community  features.  After  the  think-aloud  exercise,  we 
moved into the interview portion of the study, which focused 
more on their perceptions of the app and technology use in 
general. The think-alouds showed us how users used the app 
and provided us with concrete examples of goals set, calorie 
budgets, etc. During the interview, we asked users to reflect 
on how they have used the app over time, show what made 
them  feel  negative  and positive  emotions,  explain  how  the 
app changed their behaviors, and discuss what aspects were 
helpful to recovery and exacerbated ED symptoms.  

The  think-aloud  exercises  were  video  recorded.  The  entire 
discussion was audio recorded; thus, transcriptions represent 
both  think-alouds  and  interviews.  Each  session  took 
anywhere between 40 minutes and 1 hour and 45 minutes. 
We  conducted  a  total  of  16  sessions  because  we  saw 
repetitive  themes  in  participants’  responses  (i.e.,  data 
saturation) [25].  

Analysis 
The  audio  files  from  the  data  collection  sessions  were 
transcribed  into  electronic  format  (approximately  278 
pages).  This  was  appropriate  because  the  goal  was  “to 
analyze  the  content  of  communication”  to  understand  the 
participant’s  experience  (p.  2937)  [50].  Then  we  used 
thematic analysis to identify themes across the data set [5]. 
As participants explained their use over time, we noticed a 
lot  of  discussions  about  “before”  and  “after”,  so  we  first 
grouped discussions according to users’ descriptions of when 
they first started to use the app and then after they changed 
their  use/stopped  using  the  app.  We  then  developed  initial 
codes, searched for themes, and reviewed and grouped them 
together, which led to the final themes. 

FINDINGS 
We first present information about our participants. Then we 
discuss  how  their  app  use  changed  over  time.  Finally,  we 
provide  quotations  from  participants  that  exemplify  their 
experiences. Specifically, we focus on: 

1.  Disordered use of weight loss apps (such as obsessive 
logging, need to be exact, acute awareness of numbers, 
restricting,  manipulating  the  app  to  lose  weight, 
compensatory behaviors, manipulating the app to avoid 
negative emotions), 

2.  Making  a  change  (such  as  adding  in  calories  and/or 
focusing on nutrition and taking a break from apps), and 

3.  Falling back into old habits. 

These showcase the participants’ journey of weight loss app 
use as many reflected on their eating disorder and app usage 
over time. 

Participants 
Participants  were  ages  18-23  with  the  mean  being  20.88 
years. The majority of participants identified as White (non-
Hispanic)  (n=12)  with  one  from  Israel.  Two  identified  as 
Asian, Asian American, or Pacific Islander, 1 identified as 

Self-tracking Mental HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA644multi-racial,  and  1  identified  as  Native  American  or 
American Indian. As shown in Table 1, most participants had 
not  been  professionally  diagnosed  with  an  eating  disorder 
(n=12),  and  most  reported  being  in  recovery  or  recovered 
(n=13).  Participants  estimated  they  had  an  eating  disorder 
anywhere from 2 months to 7 years, and their eating disorder 
behaviors  included  extreme  restriction,  obsession  with 
“healthy”  foods,  bingeing,  excessive  and  compensatory 
exercise, purging, and extreme anxiety and concern related 
to  food  and  weight.  Most  (n=13)  felt  their  eating  disorder 
began  before  using  weight  loss  apps.  Participants  reported 
using weight loss apps between 2 months and 8 years (mean 
of 35.63 months or 2.97 years with a standard deviation of 
31.92  months  or  approximately  2  years).  The  most 
commonly used app was MyFitnessPal (n=15). 

Founded in 2005, MyFitnessPal1 has become one of the most 
popular weight loss apps [52]. It allows users to create a diet 
plan  by  entering  their  height,  starting  weight,  goal  weight, 
weekly weight loss/gain goal, and activity level. Users can 
enter  their  foods  by  searching  the  database  of  foods, 
manually entering calories, or scanning barcodes, and they 
can input exercise manually or by synchronizing other apps 
or  wearables,  such  as  Fitbit.  The  app  also  allows  users  to 
track nutrients, such as carbohydrates, and set nutrient goals. 
MyFitnessPal 
calories 
consumed/burned, weight loss, and nutrients. Users can also 
choose to connect with other users through adding friends, 
messaging  friends,  participating  in  challenges,  and  posting 
on the MyFitnessPal forums.  

visualizations 

provides 

of 

Patterns of Use 
Participants  discussed  not  only  their  current  use  of  weight 
loss apps, but also their past use and how it has changed over 
time. Because many participants have been using weight loss 
apps for over a year (and some many years), they shared how 
their eating disorder influenced their app use and how the app 
impacted  their  eating  disorder.  Most  participants  also  felt 
they were in recovery from their eating disorder, which gave 
them the opportunity to reflect on how they arrived at this 
point  in  their  health  journey.  In  fact,  some  participants 
actually referred to their eating disorder and subsequent app 
experience as a journey. 

In 

In hearing their experiences, a pattern of use began to emerge 
as  shown  in  Figure  1.  The  lines  in  the  figure  represent 
the  beginning,  participants’ 
bidirectional  arrows. 
intentions were most commonly to lose weight (whether or 
not  they  were  at  a  healthy  weight).  When  they  first  began 
using  weight  loss  apps,  they  found  them  helpful  in  losing 
weight  and  tracking  their foods  even  though  some  of  their 
behaviors  were  disordered.  A  number  of  participants 

1 https://www.myfitnesspal.com/ 

describe how their diet and tracking sort of  “spiraled out of 
control”. As time went on, participants began to think that 
they  may  have  an  eating  disorder  and  that  the  app  was 
exacerbating  it.  Upon  this  realization,  participants  would 
either decide to use the app as a tool to eat more or stop using 
the app altogether. However, participants often began using 
weight loss apps again and felt they were battling their eating 
disorder  mindset  even  when  recovery  was  the  focus.  We 
showcase  their  journey  by  providing  quotations  regarding 
their experiences of (1) using the app in a disordered way, 
(2) deciding to make a change, and (3) falling back into old 
habits.  

Disordered Use of Weight Loss Apps 
During  the  height  of  their  eating  disorders,  participants 
talked a lot about the ways they used weight loss apps in an 
unhealthy manner (even though they did not often recognize 
their  behaviors  as  disordered  early  on)  and  ways  the  app 
impacted them.  

Obsessive logging 
A  number  of  participants  explained  that  they  became 
obsessed  with  logging  their  food  and  began  using  the  app 
multiple times a day. One participant talked about how she 
felt the need to log everything she ate: 

“I got more hung up on tracking everything. Before I could 
just eat something. I didn’t have to worry about logging it 
into something. I didn’t really keep track of it throughout the 
day….  Then  the  ability  to  track  it  only  made  it  [eating 
disorder behaviors] worse… Definitely before [recovery], it 
was  really  bad.  Like  I  would  get  on  there  [the  app]  a  few 
times a day, like more than the 3, and just be very obsessive 
about it.” [U02] 

Similarly, another participant discussed how obsessive food 
logging and tracking turned into an eating disorder: 

“I started to diet and that's kind of how my eating disorder 
manifested  itself,  after  the  diet  became  an  obsession  with 
tracking  my  food  and  how  low  I  could  get  the  number 
basically… When I was in the middle of my eating disorder, 
I would definitely use it [the app] everyday. And it was one 
of  those  things  where  I  would  pretty  much  try  and  track 
everything the day before.” [U06] 

These  participants  explained  that  they  used  the  app  many 
times a day everyday to the point that they felt compelled to 
log and track their foods and check the app. 

Need to be exact 
Participants  also  talked  about  how  they  felt  the need  to  be 
exact with recording their calories and macronutrients. 

Self-tracking Mental HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA645 
 
                                                           
ID 

Professionally 
Diagnosed 

ED2 / ED Behaviors 

Do you think 
you currently 
have an ED? 

ED 
Length 

ED Before 
or After 
App 

Apps Used 

App Use 
Length 

U01 

U02 

U03 

U04 

U05 

U06 

U07 

U08 

U09 

U10 

U11 

U12 

U13 

U14 

U15 

U16 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

No 

No 

No 

Anorexic behaviors, binge 
eating 
Anorexic behaviors, 
orthorexia3 
Anorexia nervosa, exercise 
anorexia 
Anorexic behaviors, 
EDNOS/OSFED4, excessive 
exercise, strict diet 
Anorexic behaviors, back and 
forth between eating and not 
eating 
Anorexia nervosa, orthorexia, 
binge eating disorder 
Anorexic behaviors, 
restriction, purging 
Anorexic behaviors, barely 
ate, some bingeing, 
EDNOS/OSFED 
Anorexia nervosa 

Bulimia nervosa 

EDNOS/OSFED, binge 
eating-exercise/diet-binge 
eating, had great anxiety 
related to eating/dieting 
Bulimia nervosa 

Anorexia nervosa 

EDNOS/OSFED, always 
thinking about food, need to 
track everything eaten, 
concern when not hitting 
macronutrients, restriction, 
bingeing 
Anorexia nervosa 

EDNOS/OSFED, anxiety 
about food, afraid to eat 
"unhealthy" in pubic, bingeing 
in private, compensatory 
exercise, diet-bingeing cycles 

No 

Yes 

No 

No 

2 months 

After 

MyFitnessPal 

2 months 

1 year 

Before 

6 years 

Before 

1 year 

Before 

MyFitnessPal, 
Nike+Running 
MyFitnessPal 

MyFitnessPal, 
MapMyRun 

1 year 

8 years 

4 years 

No 

2 years 

Before 

MyFitnessPal, Fitbit, 
Moodnotes 

4 months 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

No 

Yes 

Yes 

3 years 

After 

MyFitnessPal, FitBit 

4 years 

1 year 

Before 

MyFitnessPal 

5 months 

1 year 

Before 

2 years 

Before 

Before 

6-7 
years 
>4 years 

MyFitnessPal, 
WeightWatchers, 21 
Day Fix 
MyFitnessPal, 
Calorie Counter 
MyFitnessPal 

7 years 

7 years 

4 years 

Before 

MyFitnessPal 

8 months 

6 months 

Before 

Cronometer 

3 years 

After 

MyFitnessPal 

1.5 years 

5 months 

7 years 

Before 

MyFitnessPal 

2 years 

No 

No 

1 year 

Before 

4 years 

Before 

2 years 

5 years 

Lose It, Steps, 
MyFitnessPal 
MyFitnessPal, FitBit, 
Nike Running App, 
Nike Training App, 
Healthy Out, Eating 
Well, Spartan Race 

Table 1. Information about participants’ eating disorder and app use 

Figure 1. Patterns of weight loss app use

2 ED = eating disorder 
3 Orthorexia is an obsession with eating healthy foods. 
4 EDNOS = eating disorder not otherwise specified; OSFED = other specified feeding or eating disorder  

Self-tracking Mental HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA646 
                                                           
 
 
One  participant  explained  how  she  would  log  every  single 
piece of food even if it were only a portion of a calorie: 

eating disorder, one participant talked about how every food 
was viewed as its calorie amount: 

“So literally, it [the app] just knew everything… It had the 
one tiny little morsel of food logged in there… I remember I 
went to church one day and I got a communion [wafer], and 
I even found the calories of it, which it’s a half of calorie, 
that doesn't matter. But I think it was still in there, so I logged 
it…  Why  would  you  even  have  that  in  there?  So  that  just 
didn't help.” [U13] 

Another participant described her anxiety around needing to 
hit  her  calorie  and  macronutrients  exactly  and  how  that 
affected her ability to spend time with her family: 

“I try to get exactly on [the number]… I like having it exactly 
on… It [the app] made me more OCD [obsessive compulsive 
disorder],  'cause  I'm  like,  ‘I  have  to  hit  this  number,’ 
basically…  It's  made  me  more,  very  stringent  on  what  I'm 
eating and making sure I hit those numbers… There was one 
time my parents wanted to go out to dinner… So, I called the 
[restaurant] so I could already track it and have it as close 
as possible. And then my parents get here, and they're like, 
‘Oh, we're going go to [this other restaurant] instead.’ And 
I was literally having anxiety about going. I didn't want to go 
to dinner. I was like, ‘No. I already had everything perfectly 
planned for my day,’ and that was probably a bad moment… 
I  feel  like  eating  disorders  stem  from  people  trying  to  be 
perfect,  and  with  this,  you're  hitting  numbers  trying  to  be 
perfect, so I think that could be kind of bad.” [U14] 

Many participants discussed how they used the app to help 
them  achieve  exactness  when 
tracking  calories  and 
macronutrients. Using the app fueled this desire to be exact 
and  resulted  in  anxiety  if  they  did  not  know  the  precise 
amount of calories and macronutrients in the foods they were 
eating in order to log them accurately.  

Acute awareness of numbers 
Weight loss apps also tend to put an emphasis on numbers 
associated  with  foods  and  exercise.  As  participants 
discussed,  this  focus  on  numbers  worsened  their  eating 
disorder behaviors. One participant talked about how the app 
made her more aware of calories, which fed into her need for 
control: 

“I guess it [the app] has made me more aware of numbers 
and just trying to meet some you know, calories burned for 
exercise and stuff like that because it will log it in there. So 
getting  really  hung  up  on  numbers  has  worsened  things… 
like you get so fixed on controlling everything because you 
know it’s at your hands, literally. You can control everything 
and then act on it. If I want to, the night before, I’ll tell myself 
what I will eat, like I get very big on planning the meal for 
the next day when it’s still the day before. So it’s a big control 
thing...” [U02] 

Similarly, another participant talked about how weight loss 
apps can change users’ relationship with food so that the food 
essentially  boils  down  to  its  numbers.  At  the  worst  of  her 

“I think it's [logging food and exercise everyday] definitely 
very triggering because you become obsessed with food, you 
look at food differently. Like now when I look at food, I see 
like that's protein, that's fat, that's carbs instead of like that's 
a chicken breast, that's peanut butter, that's a piece of bread, 
and so it's always thinking, how can I eat these things when 
I only have so many carbs or I have to eat this much protein. 
And so it's definitely very, very triggering to be tracking it all 
the  time.  And  especially  back  then  [during  my  eating 
disorder], it was like, ‘Well, that's 100 calories right there, 
like I need to eat broccoli instead, that's like 35 calories.’ It's 
a number game basically.” [U06] 

The  heavy  focus  on  the  numbers  in  weight  loss  apps  was 
problematic for a number of participants. By providing a way 
to monitor their diet so closely, the app fueled their need for 
control. 

Restricting 
One  way  participants  maintained  control  was  through 
restricting their calories. Participants described how they felt 
to  restrict  and 
encouraged  by 
accomplished  when  they  ate  under  their  daily  calorie 
allotment. One participant described how she was almost in 
competition  with  herself  and  the  app  to  eat  fewer  calories 
each day: 

to  continue 

the  app 

“I kind of set it [my goal], and then it [the app] gave me a 
calorie count of maybe 1200 calories. But I never wanted to 
go above 1000 calories. I remember like coming home from 
the  gym,  and  if  I  was  around  like  500  calories,  like  I  was 
happy with that… so I definitely didn't want to be anywhere 
near the maximum. I wanted to be underneath. So that's like 
a negative thing, thinking back… But at the time, it was kind 
of like a game to beat the calories, kind of. So one day I had 
a  0,  maybe  it  was  like  a  negative  calorie.  I  was  like,  ‘Oh, 
wow, like look at me, like that's cool!’ But that's not what you 
should be thinking [laughs]. Or the days where I was eating 
like above 1000, I was like, ‘Oh, I ate way too much today,’ 
just because I wanted to be like way under the like 1200… 
Just because like you can visualize what you're eating, so the 
more you don't eat, it's like, ‘Oh I beat the app!’… I definitely 
wanted to beat the calories they gave me. I feel like that kind 
of does start an eating behavior where you don't want to eat 
anything.” [U07] 

Similarly, another participant talked about how the app made 
it seem “good” to eat under the allotted calories and how she 
felt proud when she did: 

“It [the app] had you put in your weight and stuff. I think 
that the calories they gave you was the lowest that it would 
give  you  [laughs].  And  then  it  just  became  this  weird 
competition thing with it… [I felt] amazing [when I ate under 
my calorie allotment]… I just felt like I achieved my goal for 
the day. I just felt a sense of achievement. And then each day 
I  would  get  lower  and  lower  and  lower…  Because  it  [the 

Self-tracking Mental HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA647app] taught you that if you went over, you didn't succeed that 
day.  But  if  you  went  under, then  congrats,  you're  going  to 
lose weight! You did what you were supposed to do that day... 
At the end of the night I would look through what I ate, and 
if it was mostly vegetables or something, I'd be proud, and 
then if it was strayed from that a little, I would probably freak 
out.” [U13] 

Participants discussed how the apps could contribute to their 
restrictive  behaviors  by  making  it  seem  like  a  game  to  eat 
less than the given amount and less than the prior day. By 
seeing  that  they  ate  under  their  calorie  budget,  many 
participants  would  feel  a  sense  of  accomplishment,  which 
fueled  their  desire  to  continue  and  even  intensify  their 
restrictive behaviors. 

Manipulating the app to lose weight 
Some  participants  talked  about  ways  they  manipulated  the 
app so that they were actually netting less calories than the 
app stated. This was often achieved by not honestly reporting 
information about exercise and activity level. For instance, 
one  participant  talked  about  how  she  reported  her  activity 
level as “sedentary” even though she was really active so that 
she would lose more weight quickly: 

It [the app] only takes you as low as 1200 calories because 
that's a regular diet would recommend, the lowest you can 
go. So I would adjust my diet… I put in I wasn't active even 
though I was really active, so my maintenance calories were 
already lower than they should have been. And then if I put 
in like lose 2lbs per week, it would be even lower. So I feel 
like  that  can  be  manipulative…  I  think  it  can  easily  spiral 
into like disordered eating.” [U03] 

Another  participant  explained  how  she  would  do  a  lot  of 
calorie-burning activities and then go to the gym but never 
log calories burned from exercise: 

“I was dancing 4 days a week for like 2-ish hours and then I 
was  swimming  4-5  days  a  week  for  1-2  hours  as  well  as 
thinking I needed to start lifting. So I would in between all 
that,  go  to  the  gym  4  times  a  week  and  lift  up  the  10lb 
dumbbells,  so  my  calorie  expenditure  was  probably  3000-
4000 calories a day, and I was eating 1000… I didn't [record 
my exercise]. I don't think I ever recorded it simply because 
I knew I was doing so much.” [U06] 

These  participants  manipulated  their  calorie  budgets  and 
expenditures by not accurately inputting their activity level 
and exercises. Without exercise, the app told them that they 
would lose weight, so being more active than reported acted 
as buffer or a means to more quickly achieve weight loss.   

Compensatory behaviors 
While participants felt rewarded by staying under their daily 
calorie  allotment,  sometimes  they  would  exceed  those 
budgets,  and  the  app  would  reflect  that.  Participants  often 
purged  through  exercise  but  sometimes  vomited.  Many 
talked  about  how  they  restricted  their  intake  more  the 
following  days  to  compensate  for  being  over  budget.  One 

participant  described  how  she  would  use  exercise  to  “get 
calories back” and would restrict more if she exceeded her 
allotment:  

“If I see the red, it's pretty much a bad day, and I feel like I 
have to start all over again. So then you'll probably see the 
next week [I’ll] be super low in like everything… I used to 
work at [a doughnut shop], so I would snack on things there, 
so  you  can  log  having  a  [doughnut  hole]…  and  I  actually 
had eaten a lot of calories, and I felt like crap… And I logged 
it,  and  I  think  it  went  into  the  red.  When  I  went  to  gym,  I 
worked out for so long that day, and I was able to see it go 
back to green and still say it had remaining calories… Like 
to see it go back to green made me feel like, ‘Ok, like I'm fine’ 
even though in retrospect, even if I'm eating a bunch of crap 
and exercising, that's really not that much healthier… But I 
liked seeing it go from like red to green. 

Another  participant  discussed  how  she  used  exercise  to 
“cancel out” calories: 

“So  I  kind  of  used  this  app  to  document  like  every  single 
thing I did. So if I went for like an hour walk, I would put it 
in here. And like every little exercise I did to get calories out 
of the app, I would do that… the exercise part was kind of 
how I was able to get to my 500 calorie limit. Normally, I 
would only want to eat around 800 or 900 calories, and then 
after exercise, it would drop down to, I would normally burn 
like 300 calories, so it would get pretty low. I remember one 
day… after exercising, I was at 0 calories. And I was like, 
‘Look! Look at this! That's kind of cool.’ Like thinking about 
it, it's like so bad, but the app's kind of designed that way, to 
kind of want you to cancel out your calories.” [U07] 

The apps are designed in a way that allows users to “remove” 
calories eaten by adding in exercise. Participants often talked 
about  how  they  would  utilize  exercise  as  a  way  to 
compensate for going over their calories for the day. They 
also  would  eat  less  in  the  days  following  exceeding  their 
calorie budget. 

Manipulating the app to avoid negative emotions 
Exceeding  the  calorie  budget  almost  always  resulted  in 
negative feelings, such as guilt and shame. In order to avoid 
those feelings, some participants would not log their food if 
they  knew 
their  allotment.  One 
participant  talked  about  how  she  felt  devastated  when  she 
significantly  exceeded  her  calorie  budget,  so  she  would 
rather not enter it on the app: 

they  would  exceed 

“Normally on my cheat days, I try not to even enter it in the 
app because I didn't want to see it on the app [laughs]. But I 
think  we  went  to  the  [restaurant]  with  my  dad,  and  I 
remember me and my sister, we split a cheesecake, and she 
went to enter it in the app and saw that it had 40 saturated 
fats! And she literally started to almost cry after seeing that 
'cause like, that's just almost, it's weird to say, but it's kind of 
devastating just because like visually, once you start losing 
weight, I started to picture the food I ate on parts of my body. 
So  I  was  like,  ‘That  cheesecake's  going  to  go  right  to  my 

Self-tracking Mental HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA648thighs, like right to my stomach.’ I didn't even enter it in the 
app 'cause I was like, ‘I don't want to see it,’ like I didn't want 
to know.” [U07] 

Another  participant  also  did  not  want  to  see  how  many 
calories she consumed on the app: 

“What actually happens is if it's way over, I just don't log it 
[because] I don't want to see the damage. So I literally won't 
log  it…  I  avoid  that  negative  emotion  by  just  simply  not 
logging it.” [U10] 

The act of logging those foods and visualizing the calories 
on the app made it seem “real”, which resulted in too much 
guilt and shame. By selectively inputting their calories, some 
participants  were  able  to  minimize  negative  emotions 
associated with exceeding their calorie budget. 

Making a change 
Many participants explained that at some point they began to 
realize  their  behaviors  and  thoughts  associated  with  food, 
exercise,  and  body  image  were  unhealthy.  When  they 
actively  decided  to  try  to  be  healthier,  participants  would 
either change how they used the app or stop using the app. 

Adding in calories and/or focusing on nutrition 
One way participants changed their app usage and oriented 
their  use  towards  recovery  was  by  slowly  adding  more 
calories to their diet and focusing more on nutrition. Through 
the  app,  they  logged  additional  calories  as  well  as 
macronutrients. This essentially taught them that they could 
eat more, which reduced their fears around weight gain. One 
participant  talked  about  how  adding  calories  and  tracking 
macronutrients helped her recover: 

"I  slowly  added  calories,  and  then  that's  when  I  started 
tracking my macros, like my protein, carbs, and fat, to reach 
a certain amount to slowly gain weight, and then I guess you 
could say the way I use the app in recovery, like it kind of 
taught me how to eat again because when I would eat, it was 
just so disordered. I would have like 5 crackers. It was just 
all over the place. So I would say tracking my macros on here 
[the app] helped me recover because it taught me how to eat 
again,  like  a  breakfast,  lunch,  dinner,  and  then  snacks.” 
[U03] 

Another participant explained how seeing that she could eat 
more without gaining too much weight helped her: 

“It's  [the  app]  helped…  I  can  fit  certain  things  into  my 
macros  and  not  feel  bad  about  it.  I  was  fitting  an  Oreo 
everyday  kind  of  thing  and  realized  that  there's  no  bad 
foods… It helped me eat a lot more. This past off-season I 
was eating so much. Honestly, I don't want get back up to 
that point, but it really helped my metabolism get up and so 
I could track it and realize, ‘Oh, I can eat this much food and 
still stay pretty lean.’” [U14]  

While participants were still logging their foods, they began 
to change their perceptions around food, which helped them 
in their recovery. 

Taking a break from weight loss apps 
Sometimes participants felt the best course of action for their 
recovery  was  to  stop  using  the  app.  For  example,  one 
participant  talked  about  how  ceasing  use  really  helped  her 
recover: 

“[sigh]  I  took  a  break  from  tracking,  like  the  past  year,  I 
stopped using the app and just kind of started eating like a 
normal  person  again,  and  that  was  really  nice  so.  I  think 
everyone should do that, and I think that's really what has 
helped me.” [U06] 

Another participant described how she stopped using the app 
when it consumed too much of her time and she was having 
anxiety attacks about food: 

“I  went  to  a  psychologist  on  campus…  because  I  was  so 
anxious. And if I would binge-eat, then it would have been 
binge-eating of vegetables because I was so anxious about 
gaining  weight.  Just  something  at  some  point  after  a  long 
miserable, I think semester at least, I just said no more and 
this  is  crazy.  Nothing  should  drive  me  nuts,  like  food.  So 
that's  when  I  said,  ‘I'm  going  to  erase  it  [the  app],  I'll  be 
fine.’ Then I would cheat a little bit, like I would remember 
everything. So I would write down on a paper. I had this and 
this and like add it up and do a calculation in my head. But 
that's when I erased it [the app], when it was just occupying 
me and energy-wise and time-wise just to insanity really.” 
[U12] 

At some point, many of the participants stopped using weight 
loss  apps  at  least  for  some  period  of  time  because  they 
thought it would help with recovery. 

Falling Back into Old Habits 
Although a number of participants took a break from using 
weight loss apps, many of them began using weight loss apps 
again. Even when participants had recovery goals in mind, 
they  wanted  to  use  weight  loss  apps  to  keep  track  of  their 
foods  or  to  lose  weight.  Some  participants  described 
pressures to lose weight and be fit as a result of being athletes 
or  fitness  competitors,  and  they  felt  the  app  in  some  ways 
was the only way to achieve that: 

 “[I started to use the app again because of] just the desire 
to  lose  the  weight  because  I  know  that  I  can't  do  it  on  my 
own. I really enjoyed competing in the body building show, 
and I really enjoyed that experience of being on stage and 
it's like this very glamorous day, you've never felt prettier. 
You get your hair done, your makeup done, it's crazy, it's a 
great day. But it was the after effects that I struggled with, 
and so I want to do that again, but I know I'm not ready to 
do it if I can't lose the weight on my own and like get to a 
better starting point… I think that I am at a healthy weight, 
just not where I want to be.” [U06] 

In  addition  to  wanting  to  track  foods,  one  participant 
explained that deleting the app caused her anxiety, so she felt 
compelled to use it to manage her diet: 

Self-tracking Mental HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA649“Last summer, I had to delete it. I deleted it and had to get it 
back 'cause I was like, ‘Oh, my gosh, I need to know what I'm 
eating.’ And I'm a very scientific numbers-based person, so 
I like having everything on point... So, it's hard for someone 
to  have  an  app  like  that  whenever  you're  like  that.  It 
consumes  you…  I  literally  got  anxiety,  so  I  had  to  get  it 
back… I just want to hit everything correctly.” [U14] 

While  participants  were  interested  in  supporting  their 
recovery, they often felt the need to continue to use weight 
loss apps either to help them reach athletic and fitness goals 
or to relieve anxiety around food and weight. 

DISCUSSION 
Our  findings  highlight  two  sides  to  weight  loss  apps, 
troubling the binary view of technology. On one hand, they 
can  exacerbate  and  contribute  to  eating  disorders.  On  the 
other hand, users use apps for eating disorder recovery. We 
further discuss how our findings trouble the binary view of 
technology and then provide insights from our study that are 
useful  for  designing  more  health-focused  apps  and 
technologies in the future.  

Troubling the Binary View of Technology 
Typically, studies talk about technology as either a negative 
influence  or  a  positive  one.  For  example,  from  the 
sociocultural  perspective,  technology  negatively  impacts 
body image and eating disorder behaviors while much HCI 
research views weight loss apps as beneficial to users. Our 
findings show that weight loss apps can be both negative and 
positive. In line with the sociocultural perspective, there are 
aspects of weight loss apps that contribute to and exacerbate 
eating  disorder  behaviors,  such  as  the  heavy  focus  on 
numbers, which fuels obsessive logging, makes users want 
to be exact, changes the relationship with food, and allows 
them to manipulate the app to lose more weight; and calorie 
visualizations,  which  make  users  feel  rewarded  for  eating 
under and guilty for eating over their budget and contribute 
to  their  need  to  exercise  to  compensate  for  calorie 
consumption.  Therefore,  some  users,  especially  those  who 
are still struggling with eating disorder behaviors and poor 
body  image,  can  easily  be  triggered  by  using  weight  loss 
apps. In the right mindset though, users who are trying to add 
more calories into their diet or focus on nutrition may find it 
helpful  to  track  their  foods  and  alleviate  anxiety  around 
weight gain. 

As  this  study  demonstrates,  focusing  on  a  binary  view  of 
technology  is  problematic  because  technology  is  neither 
inherently  good  nor  bad.  Thus, 
the  context  around 
technology use is crucial in understanding users’ needs and 
the  effects  of  using  health  technology,  particularly  when 
talking  about  eating  disorders.  While  many  users  believe 
weight  loss  apps  can  be  problematic  for  those  with  eating 
disorders, many stated the effects of the app depend a lot of 
how users use them and users’ own mentalities, attitudes, and 
motivations during use.   

Users go through stages of use and report both positive and 
negative effects of the app at these various stages. As users 
reflect back on their journey, they talk a great deal about the 
negative  effects  of  the  app  during  the  early  stages  of  use. 
However, when they first began using the app, they often did 
not  realize  their  behaviors  were  indicative  of  an  eating 
disorder  and  even  found  the  app  helpful.  Users  then  often 
begin  to  realize  their  behaviors  are  unhealthy.  Sometimes 
users  continue  using  the  app  to  restrict  calories  or  “erase” 
calories.  However,  some  decide  to  make  a  change  to  be 
healthier  or  focus  on  eating  disorder  recovery.  Users  are 
motivated to make a change due to personal reasons, such as 
realizing the health implications of their eating disorder (e.g., 
having  a  low  heart  rate,  infertility).  Sometimes  parents 
discover  their  daughter  has  an  eating  disorder,  and  they 
intervene by making her see a professional, ceasing use of 
the app, or controlling her meals and exercise. Other times, 
users  make  a  change  because  of  the  social  dynamics  in 
college, which often center on food (e.g., going out to eat, 
eating at the dining commons, going to parties, etc.). In order 
to participate in the “typical” college lifestyle and maintain 
friendships,  users  decide  to  stop  using  the  app,  use  it  less 
frequently,  or  use  it  differently  (i.e.,  changing  calorie 
budget). Unfortunately, because of the way in which weight 
loss  apps  are  designed  and  the  nature  of  eating  disorders, 
users sometimes revert to old habits of unhealthy eating and 
exercising  or  begin  using  the  app  when  they  feel  it  is  not 
healthy for them. This reflects users’ journey of not only how 
they used weight loss apps, but also how they perceived them 
in relation to their eating disorder.  

Weight Loss App Design 
Although weight loss apps can be used in both positive and 
negative ways, there are certain aspects of weight loss app 
design that need to be reconsidered in order to focus more on 
promoting  health.  This  study  highlights  ways  weight  loss 
apps may unintentionally promote unhealthy habits or lead 
to  negative  emotions.  For  instance,  we  found  users 
manipulate the app to avoid negative emotions, such as guilt, 
when they exceed their calorie budget, which is in line with 
Cordeiro  et  al.’s  [11]  findings  about  food  journaling  and 
negative nudges.  

When users exceed their calorie allotment, that number turns 
red.  This  happens  regardless  if  the  user  exceeds  their 
allotment  by  1  or  1000  calories.  Many  participants  talked 
about how seeing this number displayed and how “seeing the 
red” made them feel anxious and guilty. In order to alleviate 
these feelings, participants would either exercise to “get back 
in the green” or not log when they knew they would exceed 
their  budget.  As  Cordeiro  et  al.  [11]  suggested,  it  is  not 
necessary to make users feel so guilty for going over their 
budget,  especially  by  little  amounts,  as  this  may  actually 
cause users to feel badly, resort to extreme measures, or not 
use the app at all. 

When users net fewer calories than they are budgeted, many 
weight  loss  apps  show  their  calories  remaining  as  a  green 

Self-tracking Mental HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA650number.  We  found  users  felt  the  remaining  number  in 
combination with the green color encouraged them to try to 
eat under their allotted calories or purge (most often through 
exercise)  to  “remove”  calories  from  the  app.    Consuming 
fewer  calories  gave  participants  a  sense  of  pride  and 
achievement, which they felt was intensified because of how 
the app showed their food and calories. Interestingly, this is 
in contrast to Cordeiro et al. [11], who found general users 
did not feel strong positive emotions for eating under their 
calorie budget and seeing the green did not make them feel 
rewarded, which highlights how different users are impacted 
differently,  showcasing  the  interaction  between  eating 
disorders and app design. Thus, we should reconsider how 
we  visualize  being  over  or  under  budget  as  red  and  green 
have strong emotional responses based on how they are used 
throughout society. These visuals need to be more nuanced, 
perhaps using different colors. Future work needs to explore 
different  types  of  feedback  and  visualizations  and  test  for 
their impact on different types of users, including those with 
eating disorders. 

Our  findings  also  show  users  often  become  obsessed  with 
logging, which is in line with Cordeiro et al. [11]. HCI has 
typically  viewed  breaks  from  logging  as  negative  or  a 
barrier;  however,  we  should  reconsider  this  viewpoint  as 
breaks can be healthy for users to eat “normally” and listen 
to  their  body’s  signals.  For  instance,  users  with  eating 
disorders often find taking a break from using the app helps 
them  in  the  process  of  recovery.  However,  contrary  to 
Cordeiro et al. [11], users with eating disorders do not really 
“lose the habit” of logging because they feel the need have 
control  over  their  food,  diet,  weight,  etc.  This  begs  the 
question of how much and how often we should tell users to 
log? For some, we should encourage logging breaks, monitor 
how often they use the app, and recommend less use. 

We found weight loss apps create a need to be exact and an 
acute  awareness  of  numbers.  While  this  awareness  was 
mentioned in Cordeiro et al. [11], it was not as extreme. In 
HCI,  this  awareness  is  often  viewed  as  a  positive,  but  our 
work  shows  that  it  can  promote  an  unhealthy  relationship 
with  food.  While  Cordeiro  et  al.  [11]  found  users  were 
challenged to log because of the variety of foods they eat, for 
users  with  eating  disorders,  such  an  awareness  is  created 
around  calories  that  users  eat  the  same  types  of  foods 
repetitively  because  they  are  “safe”  foods.  To  counteract 
these  issues,  apps  should  focus  more  on  healthy  behaviors 
like  eating  nutrient-rich  foods  and  a  variety  of  foods.  This 
number focus is not necessarily in line with healthy lifestyle 
promotion, as echoed in Cordeiro et al.’s [11] findings about 
apps being about ease of tracking (easy to log fast food and 
pre-made food).  

Contrary to Cordeiro et al. [11] who found the eating context 
was a barrier to journaling, instead of not logging, users with 
eating disorders will preplan for or avoid social engagements 
or scenarios where they might be challenged to log; if they 

cannot preplan or avoid it, they feel anxiety, which helps to 
perpetuate their eating disorder. 

When we try to discourage users from certain behaviors, we 
have  to  make  sure  we’re  not  unintentionally  encouraging 
negative habits. For example, users saw a warning message 
of  eating  too  little  as  an  accomplishment.  It  may  also  be 
helpful to eliminate the ability to cancel out calories through 
exercise and instead allow users to track exercise but do not 
show a deduction in calories consumed. 

Because users manipulate the app to lose weight, perhaps we 
can  find  other  ways  to  determine  user  needs  besides  self-
entering.  For 
instance,  apps  could  synchronize  with 
wearables that give users a sense of what they need but do 
not show the quantifications to users. This falls in line with 
Purpura  et  al.  [32]  who  cautioned  that  weight  technology 
focuses too heavily on quantitative measures and “promotes 
behaviors  based  on  limited  understanding  of  users’  actual 
personal situations” p429.   

Currently these types of apps do not support recovery goals 
or weight gain goals, which helps explain why users may fall 
back  into  old  habits  even  when  they  have  recovery  goals. 
Some apps do not allow weight gain goals, and if they do, 
then they are not designed to persuade users to gain (green if 
under not over even if you have a weight gain goal). More 
personalization  could  help.  For  instance,  if  users  have  a 
weight gain goal, then when they exceed their budget, they 
should feel a sense of accomplishment as they are moving 
toward their goal. Current apps do not support this nuanced 
aspect  of  goal  setting.  We  need  to  reconsider  how  we 
motivate users based on their individual needs. 

There should be a shifting focus away from just weight loss 
as a marker for health, and we need to find ways to support 
this  in  apps.  Future  research  needs  to  study  the  effects  of 
design in more detail on various types of users. 

CONCLUSION 
We trouble the binary view of technology by showing that as 
users reflect on their health journey, they report both positive 
and negative effects and perceptions of weight loss apps. In 
fact, women go through a journey of weight loss apps use as 
they change and go through different stages of their eating 
disorders. While every user’s journey is somewhat different 
and  the  timeframe  between  disordered  use  and  making  a 
change varies, there are patterns of use that exist across users 
with eating disorders. This study demonstrates the dynamic 
nature  of  weight  loss  app  use,  which  is  important  for 
designing weight loss apps that promote health. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  material 
the  National  Science 
Foundation under Grant #DGE1255832. Anything expressed 
in this does not necessarily reflect the views of the NSF. 

is  supported  by 

Self-tracking Mental HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA651 
 
REFERENCES 
1. 

American Psychiatric Association (ed.). 2013. Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5). 
American Psychiatric Publishing, Washington, D.C. and 
London, England. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

Julie L. Andsager. 2014. Research directions in social 
media and body image. Sex Roles 71: 407–413. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-014-0430-4 

Rheanna N Ata, Lauren M Schaefer, and J Kevin 
Thompson. 2015. Sociocultural Theories of Eating 
Disorders. In The Wiley Handbook of Eating Disorders. 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 269–282. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118574089.ch21 

Shlomo Berkovsky, Jill Freyne, and Mac Coombe. 2012. 
Physical Activity Motivating Games. ACM Transactions 
on Computer-Human Interaction 19, 4: 1–41. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2395131.2395139 

Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using thematic 
analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in 
Psychology 3, 2: 77–101. 
https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa 

Brandon Brown, Marshini Chetty, Andrea Grimes, and 
Ellie Harmon. 2006. Reflecting on health. In CHI ’06 
Extended Abstracts, 1807–1812. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1125451.1125794 

S. Chancellor, Jessica Pater, T. Clear, E. Gilber, and 
Munmun De Choudhury. 2016. #thyghgapp: Instagram 
Content Moderation and Lexical Variation in Pro-Eating 
Disorder Communities. In CSCW, 1–13. 

Eun Kyoung Choe, Bongshin Lee, Sean Munson, Wanda 
Pratt, and Julie A Kientz. 2013. Persuasive performance 
feedback: The effect of framing on self-efficacy. In 
AMIA, 1–9. 

Eun Kyoung Choe, Nicole B. Lee, Bongshin Lee, Wanda 
Pratt, and Julie a. Kientz. 2014. Understanding 
quantified-selfers’ practices in collecting and exploring 
personal data. In CHI ’14, 1143–1152. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557372 

Felicia Cordeiro, Elizabeth Bales, Erin Cherry, and James 
Fogarty. 2015. Rethinking the mobile food journal: 
Exploring opportunities for lightweight photo-based 
capture. In CHI ’15, 1–10. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702154 

Felicia Cordeiro, Daniel a Epstein, Edison Thomaz, 
Elizabeth Bales, Arvind K Jagannathan, Gregory D 
Abowd, and James Fogarty. 2015. Barriers and Negative 
Nudges: Exploring Challenges in Food Journaling. 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’15: 1159–
1162. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702155 

Kristen M. Culbert, Sarah E. Racine, and Kelly L. 
Klump. 2015. Research Review: What we have learned 
about the causes of eating disorders - A synthesis of 
sociocultural, psychological, and biological research. 
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied 
Disciplines 56, 11: 1141–1164. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12441 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

Elizabeth V Eikey and Kayla M Booth. Recovery and 
Maintenance: How Women with Eating Disorders Use 
Instagram. In iConference, 1–12. 

D. Eisenberg, E.J. Nicklett, K. Roeder, and N.E. Kirz. 
2011. Eating Disorder Symptoms Among College 
Students: Prevalence, Persistence, Correlates, and 
Treatment-Seeking. Journal of American College Health 
59, 8: 70–707. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature13314.A 

Christopher G. Fairburn and Paul J. Harrison. 2003. 
Eating disorders. Lancet 361, 9355: 407–416. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(03)12378-1 

Jasmine Fardouly, Phillippa C Diedrichs, Lenny R 
Vartanian, and Emma Halliwell. 2015. Social 
comparisons on social media: The impact of Facebook on 
young women’s body image concerns and mood. Body 
Image 13: 38–45. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bodyim.2014.12.002 

Jasmine Fardouly and Lenny R. Vartanian. 2015. 
Negative comparisons about one’s appearance mediate 
the relationship between Facebook usage and body image 
concerns. Body Image 12: 82–88. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bodyim.2014.10.004 

Ellen E. Fitzsimmons-Craft. 2011. Social psychological 
theories of disordered eating in college women: Review 
and integration. Clinical Psychology Review 31, 7: 1224–
1237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2011.07.011 

Susannah Fox and Maeve Duggan. 2012. Mobile Health 
2012. Pew Internet & American Life Project. Retrieved 
from http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Mobile-
Health.aspx 

Visda Goudarzi and Stanislav Tomic. 2006. PEDdo: 
Steps to a healthy lifestyle. In CHI ’06 Extended 
Abstracts, 1825–1830. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1125451.1125797 

Sharon L Hoerr, Ronda Bokram, Brenda Lugo, Tanya 
Bivins, and Debra R Keast. 2002. Risk for disordered 
eating relates to both gender and ethnicity for college 
students. Journal of the American College of Nutrition 
21, 4: 307–314. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/07315724.2002.10719228 

Anne Hsu, Jing Yang, Yigit Han Yilmaz, Md Sanaul 
Haque, Cengiz Can, and Ann E. Blandford. 2014. 
Persuasive technology for overcoming food cravings and 
improving snack choices. In CHI ’14, 3403–3412. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557099 

Ji Won Kim and T Makana Chock. 2015. Body image 
2.0: Associations between social grooming on Facebook 
and body image concerns. Computers in Human Behavior 
48: 331–339. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.01.009 

Annalise G. Mabe, K. Jean Forney, and Pamela K. Keel. 
2014. Do you “like” my photo? Facebook use maintains 
eating disorder risk. International Journal of Eating 
Disorders 47: 516–523. https://doi.org/10.1002/eat.22254 

M N Marshall. 1996. Sampling for qualitative research. 
Family Practice 13, 6: 522–526. Retrieved from 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9023528 

Self-tracking Mental HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA65226. 

27. 

28. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

36. 

37. 

Evelyn P Meier and James Gray. 2014. Facebook photo 
activity associated with body image disturbance in 
adolescent girls. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social 
Networking 17, 4: 199–206. 
https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2013.0305 

Florian Mueller, Joe Marshall, Rohit Ashok Khot, Stina 
Nylander, and Jakob Tholander. 2014. Jogging with 
technology: Interaction design supportging sport 
activities. CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts: 1131–1134. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2559206.2559209 

M Neve, P J Morgan, P R Jones, and C E Collins. 2009. 
Effectiveness of web-based interventions in achieving 
weight loss and weight loss maintenance in overweight 
and obese adults: a systematic review with meta-analysis. 
Obesity Reviews: International Association for the Study 
of Obesity 11: 306–321. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
789X.2009.00646.x 

Edward Nguyen, Tanmay Modak, Elton Dias, Yang Yu, 
and Liang Huang. 2014. Fitnamo: Using bodydata to 
encourage exercise through google glassTM. In CHI ’14 
Extended Abstracts, 239–244. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2559206.2580933 

Jessica Pater, Oliver Haimson, Nazanin Andalibi, and 
Elizabeth D Mynatt. 2016. “Hunger hurts but starving 
works:” characterzing the presentation of eating disorders 
online. In CSCW, 1–16. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820030 

Richard M. Perloff. 2014. Social media effects on young 
women’s body image concerns: Theoretical perspectives 
and an agenda for research. Sex Roles: 363–377. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-014-0384-6 

Stephen Purpura, Victoria Schwanda, Kaiton Williams, 
William Stubler, and Phoebe Sengers. 2011. Fit4life: The 
design of a persuasive technology promoting healthy 
behavior and ideal weight. Proceedings of the 2011 
annual conference on Human factors in computing 
systems - CHI ’11: 423. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979003 

L. Reba-Harrelson, A. Von Holle, R. M. Hamer, R. 
Swann, M. L. Reyes, and Cynthia M. Bulik. 2009. 
Patterns and prevalence of disordered eating and weight 
control behaviors in women ages 25-45. Eating and 
Weight Disorders 14, 4. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03325116 

Mark F Reinking, Laura E Alexander, and St Louis. 
2005. Prevalence of Disordered-Eating Behaviors 
Athletes and Nonathletes. Journal of Athletic Training 
40, 1: 47–51. 

John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and 
Matthew Chalmers. 2015. Pass the ball: Enforced turn-
taking in activity tracking. In CHI ’15, 2417–2426. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702577 

Catherine A. Sanderson. 2010. Social Psychology. John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
https://doi.org/10.4135/9781446247198 

C M Shisslak, M Crago, and L S Estes. 1995. The 
spectrum of eating disturbances. The International 

Journal of Eating Disorders 18, 3: 209–219. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/1098-
108x(199511)18:3<209::aid-eat2260180303>3.0.co;2-e 

Aaron Smith. 2015. U.S. Smartphone Use in 2015. Pew 
Research Center, 1–7. Retrieved November 11, 2015 
from http://www.pewinternet.org/2015/04/01/us-
smartphone-use-in-2015/ 

Wendy Spettigue and Katherine A Henderson. 2004. 
Eating disorders and the role of the media. The Canadian 
Child and Adolescent Psychiatry Review 13, 1: 16–19. 

Katarzyna Stawarz, Anna L Cox, and Ann Blandford. 
2015. Beyond self-tracking and reminders: Designing 
smartphone apps that support habit formation. In CHI 
’15, 2653–2662. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702230 

Cassandra Marie Stover. 2014. Elements of a Sensibility: 
Fitness Blogs and Postfeminist Media Culture. The 
University of Texas at Austin. 

Samantha Stronge, Lara M. Greaves, Petar Milojev, Tim 
West-Newman, Fiona Kate Barlow, and Chris G. Sibley. 
2015. Facebook is linked to body dissatisfaction: 
Comparing users and non-users. Sex Roles 73: 200–213. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-015-0517-6 

Eric Strother, Raymond Lemberg, Stevie Chariese 
Stanford, and Dayton Turberville. 2012. Eating Disorders 
in Men: Underdiagnosed, Undertreated, and 
Misunderstood. Eating Disorders 20, 5: 346–355. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/10640266.2012.715512 

Tina Tan, Angeline Kuek, Shih Ee Goh, Ee Lian Lee, and 
Victor Kwok. 2016. Internet and smartphone application 
usage in eating disorders: A descriptive study in 
Singapore. Asian Journal of Psychiatry 19: 50–55. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ajp.2015.11.007 

Marika Tiggemann and Mia Zaccardo. 2015. “Exercise to 
be fit, not skinny”: The effect of fitspiration imagery on 
women’s body image. Body Image 15: 61–67. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bodyim.2015.06.003 

Tammy Toscos, Anne Faber, Shunying An, and Mona 
Praful Gandhi. 2006. Chick clique: Persuasive technology 
to motivate teenage girls to exercise. In CHI ’06 
Extended Abstracts, 1873–1878. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1125451.1125805 

Dhaval Vyas, Zachary Fitz-walter, Erica Mealy, 
Alessandro Soro, Jinglan Zhang, and Margot Brereton. 
2015. Exploring physical activities in an employer-
sponsored health program. In CHI ’15 Extended 
Abstracts, 1421–1426. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2702613.2732815 

T. D. Wade, A. Keski-Rahkonen, and J. Hudson. 2011. 
Epidemiology of eating disorders. In Textbook in 
Psychiatric Epidemiology (3rd ed.) (M. Tsuang). Wiley, 
New York, 343–360. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470976739.ch20 

Greg Walsh and Jennifer Golbeck. 2014. StepCity: A 
preliminary investigation of a personal informatics-based 
social game on behavior change. In CHI ’14 Extended 

38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 

43. 

44. 

45. 

46. 

47. 

48. 

49. 

Self-tracking Mental HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA653Abstracts, 2371–2376. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2559206.2581326 

52. 

50. 

51. 

Tz-Li Wang and Ya-Hui Bella Lien. 2013. The power of 
using video data. Quality & Quantity 47: 2933–2941. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11135-012-9717-0 

Elanor H. Wertheim, Susan J. Paxton, and Simone 
Blaney. 2009. Body image in girls. In Body image, eating 
disorders, and obesity in youth: Assessment, prevention, 
and treatment (2nd ed.). American Psychological 
Association, Washington, D.C., 47–76. 

2014. Hacking Health: How Consumers Use 
Smartphones and Wearable Tech To Track Their Health. 
Nielsen. Retrieved August 8, 2016 from 
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2014/hackin
g-health-how-consumers-use-smartphones-and-wearable-
tech-to-track-their-health.html 

Self-tracking Mental HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA654 
