Leveraging Intermediated Interactions to Support
Utilization of Persuasive Personal Health Informatics

Ntwa Katule
University of Cape Town
Department of Computer
Science
Cape Town, South Africa
katulentwa@gmail.com

Melissa Densmore
University of Cape Town
Department of Computer
Science
Cape Town, South Africa
mdensmore@cs.uct.ac.za

Ulrike Rivett
University of Cape Town
Department of Information
Systems
Cape Town, South Africa
ulrike.rivett@uct.ac.za

ABSTRACT
Behavior change support systems (BCSS) and persuasive
technologies for healthcare often entail users interacting with
mobile devices. However, especially in developing countries,
the target community is unfamiliar with and often intimi-
In this paper we propose the
dated by new technologies.
use of intermediaries to facilitate interaction with a mobile
phone-based application and to motivate ongoing use by the
target beneﬁciaries. The application incentivizes utilization
through gamiﬁcation techniques, using badges, scoreboards,
and other rewards. For example, a young girl might help her
father keep track of his walking and diet, maintaining par-
ticipation as much for her father’s health as for the social
awards given by the app. We explain how intermediaries
can be leveraged to improve utilization and engagement of
the beneﬁciaries, and describe factors aﬀecting interaction
between the participating pairs and interaction with the ap-
plication. This study highlights the importance of social
rapport - typically through a familial relationship - as a key
component of the intervention. Finally, we discuss the impli-
cations of designing for the motivation of two diﬀerent users:
gamiﬁcation, personalization and utility play diﬀerent roles
for the intermediary and the beneﬁciary but ultimately com-
bine to make a more eﬀective application for the beneﬁciary
than one targeting the beneﬁciary alone.

CCS Concepts
•General and reference → General conference pro-
ceedings; •Human-centered computing → Empirical
studies in HCI; •Social and professional topics → User
characteristics;

Keywords
HCI4D, intermediated interactions, persuasive technologies,
gamiﬁcation, personal informatics, motivational aﬀordances,
health

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than
ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or re-
publish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
ICTD ’16, June 03-06, 2016, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
c(cid:13) 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4306-0/16/06. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2909609.2909664

1.

INTRODUCTION

Approximately 1.3 billion people are considered to be ei-
ther overweight or obese worldwide, of which two-thirds are
found in low- income or developing countries [34]. While
this pandemic used to be considered a “ﬁrst world problem”,
urbanization and changing lifestyles have led to increasing
problems for the low-income communities of the developing
world. For example, 60% of South Africans are overweight,
with four in 10 women that are either overweight or clinically
obese [24].

A typical intervention from the West might entail develop-
ment of a persuasive application to encourage healthy eating
and exercise behaviors [3, 14]. Persuasive applications on
mobile phones are particularly well-positioned for interven-
tions that target psychological processes, because they are
pervasively present for the users [16]. Gamiﬁcation, enabling
self-reﬂection, or more simple strategies such as SMS-based
reminders all motivate positive experiences and more fre-
quent engagement [6, 14]. The subset of these interventions
that target collection of personal history entry, review and
analysis is broadly called personal informatics, or personal
health informatics (PHI) for health interventions.

However these applications fail to replicate well to typical
populations targeted by information and communications
technology for development (ICTD) interventions [17]. In
part this is due to problems of technology access: people do
not own phones, share phones, or do not know how to use
them. In the context of obesity, many potential target users
are older, further exacerbating the problem. As a result,
more typical ICTD interventions target community health
workers (CHWs) or other intermediaries as facilitators of
access to mobile content
[29, 30, 23]. However, Sambasi-
van et al suggest another resource - young girls and boys in
the community can be leveraged as intermediaries for older
adults seeking to interact with new technologies [32]. Thus,
we propose that persuasive PHI might be more eﬀective if
it incorporates intermediaries to motivate participation.

In this paper, we present the results of a series of studies
conducted in two townships in Cape Town, South Africa.
In these studies, we have deployed a mobile application to
support PHI for overweight or pre-diabetic adults. The ap-
plication primarily incorporates gamiﬁcation strategies such
as challenges, badges, and leaderboards for motivating on-
going use. Each adult elects an intermediary to assist with
use of the application, and is given airtime to use the ap-
plication for two to six weeks. We identify characteristics
of eﬀective intermediaries, highlighting social rapport as a

key contributor towards eﬀectiveness of the application. Us-
ing qualitative feedback from participants, we also discuss
important aspects of intermediated interaction and implica-
tions of intermediation on design of persuasive technologies.
Ultimately we ﬁnd that intermediated persuasive technolo-
gies are an eﬀective way to improve engagement of adults
with PHI.

2. RELATED WORK

Persuasive technologies have evolved from prescriptive na-
ture of information ﬂow in between health care providers and
health care recipients [5] to behaviour change support sys-
tems (BCSS) [20]. Oinas-kukkonen [25] deﬁned BCSS as “a
socio-technical information system with psychological and
behavioural outcomes designed to form, alter or reinforce
attitudes, behaviours or an act of complying without using
coercion or deception”.

In order for a system to be persuasive, the persuasion goal
in design must be intentional [14]. The persuasive system
design (PSD) model proposes a set of functionality required
for a system to be considered a persuasive technology [26].
The ﬁrst set of functionality falls under primary task sup-
port, which includes but is not limited to: reduction of com-
plex behaviours into simple tasks; guiding the user through
experiences while persuade along the way; tailoring of per-
suasive information to factors relevant to a user group; per-
sonalization of content; and self-monitoring for users to keep
track of their performance in achieving goals. The second
set of functionality falls under dialogue support, which in-
cludes praises, rewards, reminders, similarity, liking, and so-
cial roles. The third set of functionality falls under system
credibility support, which includes trustworthiness, exper-
tise, surface credibility etc. The last set of functionalities
emphasize the role of social support, which includes social
learning, social comparison, and competition.

Gamiﬁcation is also garnering popularity as a means to
persuade people because of its ability to invoke users’ in-
trinsic experiences through gameful experiences [14]. Gam-
iﬁcation is the use of game design elements in non-game
contexts [7] with an objective of increasing engagement in
a particular activity. A systematic review on peer reviewed
studies found that gamiﬁcation provides positive eﬀects and
these eﬀects are highly dependent on both the context in
which gamiﬁcation is implemented and the users using it [15].
Hamari and Koivisto [13] found out that social motivations
for use of a gamiﬁed service/system are attributed to so-
cial inﬂuence, recognition, reciprocal beneﬁt, and network
exposure. Some of these attributes resonate with the func-
tionality proposed on the aforementioned PSD model for
BCSS.

Typically a BCSS will aim at sustaining engagement over
a long period of time [25], but only considers single users.
Existing literature does not consider how to design systems
that include intermediaries as part of the engagement. In
this work, we seek to understand how can one sustain en-
gagement in the context of intermediated interactions. We
explore important human factors in intermediated interac-
tions that may aﬀect utilization of persuasive personal health
informatics (PHI) that target health behavior change.
In
the next sub-sections, we discuss literature on social rela-
tionships in the context of intermediated technology use,
and utilization of human intermediaries in health behavior
change through ICTs.

2.1

Intermediaries in ICTs for Healthy Behav-
ior Change

In the context of ICTD, human intermediaries have been
previously utilized on behavior change interventions. One
study [29, 30] in India used community health workers (CHWs)
with help of mobile messages to persuade pregnant and post-
natal women together with their relatives on maternal health
issues. Community health workers interacted with mobile
phones to access persuasive messages to share with their
clients. Another study by Molapo and Marsden [23] empow-
ered rural health trainers with a software application that
allows them to create digital training content for low-literate
CHWs in Lesotho, using images, voice-over, and video clips.
While intended only for training, CHWs also chose to save
those videos with their clients, having the unintentional ef-
fect of persuading people to get tested for diseases such as
In this context CHWs were acting as inter-
tuberculosis.
mediaries as they provided access to information that had
persuasive eﬀects. CHWs are an oft-used intermediary for
communities in which direct access to health resources is dif-
ﬁcult, and are an eﬀective bridge between communities and
government-based resources. However, they are ultimately
limited in reach, typically interacting with potential beneﬁ-
ciaries only once every few weeks. Furthermore, in this case,
while CHWs are intermediaries with respect to information,
facilitating beneﬁciary access to mobile media. However, in
the case of personal health informatics, we expect that the
beneﬁciaries would be the primary users of the mobile de-
vice, and choose to explore how their access might be facili-
tated by intermediaries. As such, CHW access is ultimately
too limited for our typically-older and less technology lit-
erate target beneﬁciaries, and we build upon Sambisavan’s
example of proximate translation [32] by leveraging younger
members of the same household to sustain an ongoing use
of a BCSS even when CHWs are not available.

2.2 Social Relationships in Intermediated In-

teractions

Poole et al. [28], explored extensively the dynamics of
computer help-seeking and giving behaviors in the context
of family and social networks settings. One of the factors
that contributes to help-seeking behaviors is availability of
unlimited help provided as a part of a longer-term relation-
ship, while help-givers are motivated by a sense of being
accountable to their family and friends.

Parikh and Ghosh [27] were early pioneers in bringing
an HCI (human-computer interaction) perspective towards
understanding intermediation in the context of developing
world. Their work emphasized an understanding of a tax-
onomy of intermediated information tasks of where diﬀerent
modes of access have their own design requirements such as
cooperative versus dominated interactions or intermediated
versus indirect interactions. Sambasivan et al. [32] further
conducted an ethnographic study in urban slums of Banga-
lore in India and proposed the following design implications:
that technology should be reoriented to allow sharing and
supporting secondary users (beneﬁciary users) through per-
sistent storage of information for retrieval at later stages;
that evaluation metrics of use should go beyond ownership
to measuring the ability to beneﬁt from use; and that de-
signs should consider and enable asymmetric engagement.
Their work further emphasizes the critical role of human
relations, such as interpersonal trust, as the foundation of

intermediated interactions. The concept of social relations
is also implicitly discussed by Sukumaran et al. [36] who
report on an experiment carried out to investigate if social
prominence of an intermediary versus technology aﬀects per-
ceived information characteristics and attitudes towards an
interaction by a beneﬁciary user. Their preliminary ﬁndings
suggest that when the technology was more visible and an
intermediary did not monopolize access (situation of social
equality), participants tended to feel more engaged and pos-
itive. Ramirez et al. [31] studied of how human factors such
as empathy and technical skills of infomediaries inﬂuence the
outcomes of the process of infomediation to users at public
access venues.

In order to sustain frequency of interaction with a par-
ticular system, aforementioned initiatives rely on innate in-
trinsic motivation of intermediary and beneﬁciary users. As
discussed by Sambasivan et al. [32], usually a request for
interaction is initiated by beneﬁciaries, and intermediaries
will respond based on existing reciprocal beneﬁts or prior
social relationships. Therefore, instigation to engage with a
system is mediated by help-seeking behaviors of beneﬁciary
users. An intermediary’s decision to help is determined by
prior social relationships.

In our approach we continue to emphasize strengthening
of existing social relationships through motivational strate-
gies that aim to increase user experience of both interme-
diary and beneﬁciary users. We report on (1) motivational
factors that increase the frequency of help-seeking behaviors
of beneﬁciary users and (2) factors that motivate interme-
diaries to instigate help-giving in interacting with a BCSS
instead of relying on existing relationships or beneﬁciaries’
help-seeking behaviors alone. We suggest that designing
BCSS to enable intermediary engagement will increase sus-
tained engagement on the part of the beneﬁciary.

3. CONTEXT

Both overweight and obesity are associated with increased
incidence of multiple co-morbidities including type 2 dia-
betes, cancer and cardiovascular diseases (CVD) [12]. Obe-
sity is a development problem since it has both an indi-
rect implication on health care systems and gross domestic
product (GDP). Abegunde et al. [1] surveyed a total of 23
low-income and middle-income countries found out that an
estimated US$84 billion of economic production was going to
be lost in between 2006 and 2015 from heart disease, stroke,
and diabetes alone if there would not be any measures in
place.

We carried out this work in Cape Town, South Africa.
South Africa is one of the developing countries having been
most aﬀected by the current obesity pandemic [2]. Accord-
ing to data on human development index (HDI) by country,
South Africa is among countries grouped in medium HDI
countries. A systematic review by Dinsa et al. [8] revealed
that in countries in the group of medium HDI, the relation-
ship between social economic status (SES) and obesity is
largely mixed for men meaning that both people of high SES
and low SES are aﬀected, and mainly negative for women;
women with low SES are more at risk compared to their
counterparts with high SES. This suggests obesity is also
aﬀecting the poor in countries like South Africa. Within
South African context obesity aﬀects diﬀerent age groups
including old adults [2]. Thus, the focus of our research is
primarily on adults from low income suburbs who are not

very conversant with technology. We targeted this group
since most persuasive PHI do not yet target them, despite
the prevelance of obesity in the population.

In initial testing and evaluation of the software prototype
we developed, we worked with participants from Philippi
and Langa in Cape Town, South Africa. The two sub-
urbs were previously designated for people who were Black
In 2011 the population of
Africans during apartheid era.
Langa was 52,401 with 17,400 households of which 72% of
households had a monthly income of ZAR3200 ( ˜US$210) or
less. In the same year the population in Philippi was 191,025
with 61,797 households of which the monthly income of 78%
of the households was also ZAR3200 or less. These data are
available at the website of Cape Town municipality1. The
ceiling for low income earners in South Africa is ZAR54,344
per annum ( ˜US$3500 per annum)2.

4. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION

The system is composed of two parts as shown in Fig-
ure 1. The ﬁrst part is a native pedometer application de-
veloped using open source code. The second part consists of
a web application hosted on a server at University of Cape
Town. The pedometer sends a count of all steps walked
by the holder of the mobile phone to the web application.
The web application allows users to view step graphs and to
record meals eaten by beneﬁciaries. Additional features in-
clude a reward sub-system in which we implemented gamiﬁ-
cation motivators such points, badges, leaderboard, a botan-
ical garden, and ﬁsh tank. Rewards were earned if a user
uses the application for both viewing of steps and recording
meals, and if a beneﬁciary user walks a number of steps that
exceed a certain threshold that has been set for a particu-
lar level of gamiﬁcation. As a beneﬁciary user walks more
steps and the application is used more regularly, a pair of
users that forms a team (a beneﬁciary and an intermediary)
will gain more advanced badges. An advanced badge gives
more resources that nurture the garden or ﬁsh tank. Also,
users can improve upon the quality of their gardens and ﬁsh
tanks by adopting healthier eating habits and recording the
consumption of more fruits and vegetables recorded. Users
receive text messages that update them on their status and
tips on how to improve on badges, gardens and ﬁsh tanks.
Text messages are personalized and they are addressed to
intermediaries. Each message starts with with an informal
greeting and the name of the person and ﬁnishes with either
a reminder, a tip of how to win rewards, or a feedback on
status about rewards. Figure 2 shows screenshots of the web
interface.

5. METHODS

5.1 Contextual Inquiry

We conducted a contextual inquiry using a series of semi-
structured interviews with a convenience sample of diabetic
patients at a diabetes and endocrinology clinic of Groote
Schuur Hospital in Cape Town. This was conducted in be-
tween March and May of the year 2013. The objective was

data was

1https://www.capetown.gov.za/
2This
retrieved
ber
from
content/uploads/2013/01/Household-
expenditure-patterns-Press-Release-3Jan2012.pdf

18th
of Novem-
http://www.unisa.ac.za/news/wp-
income-and-

2015

on

Figure 1: Information ﬂow inside the system

Internet-based services (e.g. e-mail, WhatsApp, general In-
ternet browsing, Facebook). This suggests that majority of
the aged participants were likely to be less conversant with
cellphone technology. Only three participants had used their
cellphones in management of their health, to look for infor-
mation on the Internet and to participate in social support
groups on Facebook. Only one participant had used a pe-
dometer before.

We also found that twenty participants had asked for in-
formal help from intermediaries before, in tasks such as:
(1) to setup or conﬁgure services and apps on their phones
(e.g. Whatsapp, Facebook); (2) to be taught how to oper-
ate or navigate through certain features (e.g. a phone book
of a new or unfamiliar cellphone, Whatsapp); and (3) to
be helped in interacting with certain features such as SMS,
Internet browsing etc. The level of dependence on inter-
mediaries varied depending on frequency of tasks at hand.
Tasks such as conﬁguration of services and apps or teaching
of individuals occur only at the beginning when there is a
new application or device. When participants are not capa-
ble of interacting with applications that they use daily, then
they seek help more frequently. For either of these tasks,
participants chose trusted individuals to act as their inter-
mediaries, typically their children and grandchildren or, less
frequently, children of relatives, family friends, or someone
at a cellphone shop. 23 out 30 participants preferred to have
family members act as their intermediaries.

Apart from utilization of help from intermediaries, we also
observed that some of the participants share their phones
with their intermediaries. Children borrow their parents’
phones to search for school materials on the Internet or to
use social network services such as Facebook or Mxit. For
instance one participant who had a Blackberry smartphone
reported that she does not use Internet on her phone but
her kids use it to do their assignments. This is an example
of shared device use.

Our ﬁndings from this contextual enquiry indicate that a
majority of the aged participants relied on expertise of their
younger family members in solving problems on both setting
up of cellphones and interacting with speciﬁc applications.
The majority of responses show that these participants were
assisted by their sons, daughters, and grandchildren. Based
on this observation, we decided to implement a technology
that can be utilized through young intermediaries in a fam-
ily. This ﬁnding motivated the use of gamiﬁcation and the
choice of intermediaries age group in phases of evaluation
that are explained in the next sub-sections.

Figure 2: Sample screenshots from the system

to understand patterns in utilization of cellphone technology
among adults obese patients. This study was approved by
the respective institution’s ethical review body.

We interviewed a total of thirty participants of which 67%
(20) were females. The average age of these participants was
53 years old with a standard deviation of 11.8 years. Almost
86% (26) of participants were above 40 years of age. A ma-
jority of the participants were either overweight or obese and
from low income suburbs of Cape Town. Nineteen partici-
pants were either unemployed or on a disability grant. Par-
ticipants were approached opportunistically as they waited
to see their physicians. To ensure conﬁdentiality, interviews
were conducted in one of the vacant consultation rooms.
One researcher and a research assistant carried out the in-
terviews. The main topics in these semi- structured inter-
views were centred around participants’ general utilization
of mobile phones, whether they seek help from intermedi-
aries, and, if so, who their preferred intermediaries are.

Although eighteen participants had access to smartphones,
utilization of features was not beyond SMS and voice in ma-
jority of the participants. Out of 26 people whom were forty
years of age and above, not more than eight had already used

5.2

Iterative Design and Evaluation I

We conducted two iterations of design. The ﬁrst iteration
started in July 2013. We developed the ﬁrst prototype of
a web application. This prototype allowed users to self-
monitor their diet and walking patterns.
In addition, we
implemented a reward system that paired a beneﬁciary user
with an intermediary user in a team that could compete with
other teams. Scores for each team are presented as points,
badges, and the appearance of ﬁsh and plants in the tanks
and botanical gardens. Within each botanical garden and
ﬁsh tank, there was a Facebook social plug-in that allowed
users from diﬀerent teams to comment on or like each other.
We also utilized Facebook groups to remind users to engage
with the application.

In order to test our application, we recruited participants
through an NGO based in Cape Town called “Mamelani
Projects”. This NGO carries out outreach programs on
health education in less privileged communities. Mamelani
trains women on issues of HIV/AIDS, nutrition, and gender
equality. The NGO agreed to help us to recruit participants
among people they were training. We gave them the fol-
lowing recruitment criteria: (1) we want participants who
were aged 35 or above and (2) those participants must have
an intermediary to help them. The NGO helped in identi-
fying the targeted participants in Philippi township, where
the NGO was conducting its own activities. We recruited
a total of six participants whom were women above middle
age (>=35 years of age).

After recruitment of the six adults, each one of them
brought an intermediary to work together with them in a
pair. Three intermediaries were girls in between 19-23 years
of age. The remaining three intermediaries were boys aged
between 14 and 19 years of age. We informed participants
about the objectives of the study, that logs on their usage
of the phones would be collected, and about their rights as
research participants. All participants (intermediaries and
beneﬁciaries) signed consent forms except for intermediaries
who were minors. These minors signed assent forms that
were approved by their respective parents/guardians. Af-
ter signing of consent and assent forms, intermediaries were
trained on how to use the app. We deployed the application
to the ﬁeld from the end of October 2014 to beginning of
December 2014. In order to control the application environ-
ment, and limit potential complications from deploying the
intervention on multiple platforms, each pair of participants
was given one Android phone (Samsung GT-S5300) running
the pedometer app. Participants were required to utilize the
web application hosted in our institution’s server using the
browser built into the phone. We gave out airtime as an in-
centive to each participant including intermediaries. Every
week each participant got ZAR30 ( ˜US$3) worth of airtime.
In that period of deployment, only two pairs of users en-
gaged with the system for more than a few days. Both of
these two pairs consisted of a beneﬁciary and an intermedi-
ary living in the same house— the pairs consisted of mothers
working with their sons. One of these two pairs was very mo-
tivated and enthusiastic about the system. But after some
time they also got bored because they were not getting any
competition from other teams and they had attained all the
challenges within a short period of time. In a third pair, a
girl was working with her mother but they were not living
together so it was diﬃcult for her to commit to the appli-
cation. Intermediaries from the remaining two pairs showed

little enthusiasm in the project. We hypothesized this to
be due to lack of both motivation to engage with gamiﬁ-
cation and a lack of a prior social relationship between the
two users within each pair. Findings from this informative
evaluation led to another iteration in the design. It also in-
formed the manner in which we were going to conduct future
evaluations.

We started another iteration of design in January 2015 to
address the drawbacks encountered during testing of the ﬁrst
prototype. In this new version we improved the gamiﬁcation
part to make it more challenging and we also integrated SMS
reminders. In the next subsection we discuss the evaluation
of the improved system.

5.3 Evaluation II

After ﬁxing the bugs, we conducted another round of eval-
uation. We approached another group of participants who
resided in another side of Philippi. The recruitment was
facilitated by the same NGO in Evaluation I. However, be-
fore the commencement of the study, the NGO advised that
we withdraw from that area as participants expressed some
concerns regarding safety issues. The area was not safe,
hence posession of experimental phones would pose risks to
both participants and the researcher. In response, we termi-
nated this study and sought participants in Langa, which as
a smaller and more central township, is safer than Philippi.
As an aside, this incident highlights some of the limits
and dangers of doing smartphone-based interventions in low-
income areas [22]. However, we still believe that this study
has relevance, even for residents of Philippi. Intermediated
usage is not limited to smartphone applications. For ex-
ample, while SMS campaigns are not speciﬁcally designed
for intermediated interactions, it is not inconceivable that a
family member would assist a target beneﬁciary in an infor-
mal proximate interaction [32].

In Langa, we worked with a research facilitator who is a
resident of Langa. The research assistant helped with the re-
cruitment process. This time we adjusted criteria for recruit-
ment based on lessons learned during the ﬁrst deployment in
Philippi. The criteria for recruitment were (1) adults aged
35 and above with (2) school-going relatives living with them
or living nearby.

Prior to deployment we provided participants with in-
formation about the study. Participants were made aware
that the study’s cellphone will be collecting their informa-
tion related to steps and diet and transfer it to the re-
searcher’s computer at University of Cape Town. Partici-
pants who were minors signed assent forms approved by their
guardians/parents who were also part of the study. All other
participants signed consent forms. We recruited a total of
nine adults (3 men and 6 women). Each adult brought one
kid to act as their intermediary hence they formed a pair.
There were 3 boys and 6 girls. All adults were relatives
of the kids except for one adult who was the tenant of the
grandmother of her intermediary. All intermediaries were
school-going children but one. We administered a question-
naire at baseline to collect demographic information such as
age, number of cellphone applications utilized by each group
of participants. Only seven beneﬁciary participants com-
pleted the baseline survey. All nine of the kids completed
the baseline survey. The mean age for adults was 49.3 years
old (SD=7.9 years) while the mean age for kids was 14 years
old (SD=4.3). We compared the average number of applica-

tions on a cellphone utilized by each set of users by using the
student’s t-test. Intermediary participants had signiﬁcantly
interacted with more applications (M=5.4; SD=1.7) before
compared to beneﬁciary participants with (M=3.4; SD=1.5)
applications (t(14)=2.430; p=0.029; 95% CI=3.765 to 3.795
applications).

We trained each intermediary on how to use the proto-
type. Each pair of participants was given one android phone
installed with a pedometer and a link to access the web
application. We left the application in the ﬁeld for three
weeks. We provided airtime as incentives to participants.
Each adult received ZAR40 worth of airtime four times in
a period of three weeks. In addition, each pair was given
300MB of data to use on the Android phone. After three
weeks we conducted interviews with three intermediary par-
ticipants and the ﬁve beneﬁciary participants who engaged
Interviews were
with the application for more than once.
conducted in English since all the respondents were com-
fortable with English.

Out of nine pairs of users, eight attempted to engage with
the application for at least one day in a period of three weeks.
The average number of usage days for these eight partici-
pants was 4.88 days with a standard deviation of 3.4 days.
Two pairs used the application for only one day. The most
active pair used it for 11 days in total. While there were
many problems that contributed to non-use, the primary
barrier was that the data bundles allocated for the study
(300MB per phone) were expended earlier than expected.
In addition to the prescribed study use, they also used the
data bundle for other apps such as Whatsapp and download-
ing of games. We elected not to prohibit this since it has
been shown that allowing non-prescribed use can motivate
ongoing prescribed usage [33]. Ferreira [9] also emphasizes
that non-prescribed uses should not be discouraged within
the context of ICTD as they can be viewed as capabilities
that foster participation and engagement in ICTD projects.
Our synthesis on data collected through interviews uncov-
ered several themes related to social dynamics on usage of
a persuasive personal health informatics through intermedi-
aries. We discuss these ﬁndings on the next section.

6. FINDINGS

Reﬂecting upon our observations from both evaluations,
we uncovered some useful insights on social dynamics that
inﬂuenced utilization of a BCCS in our context. Usage of
the app occurred when intermediaries had access to an ex-
perimental phone. During the day, most beneﬁciaries went
to work, carrying the phone with them, while intermedi-
aries went to school. Figure 3 below shows the pattern of
the times in which there were users’ activities on the app in
evaluation II. From the graph, the peaks are shown at 5AM,
5-6PM, and 8PM. These are times when intermediaries and
beneﬁciaries were together.

When a pair meets, one of them would make a request to
engage with information on the app. Initiation of the request
to engage and success or failure in fulﬁlment of that request
were determined by social rapport within a pair, motiva-
tional triggers as the result of the app’s features, and social
interactions among beneﬁciary participants. The mentioned
factors played a part in inﬂuencing help-seeking by beneﬁcia-
ries and help-giving by intermediaries. We present in detail
about these factors on the following sub- sections. In addi-
tion, we also present perceived health beneﬁts on utilization

Figure 3: Total clicks on each hour of the day

of the application. All the names used in presentation of
ﬁndings are pseudonyms in order to ensure conﬁdentiality
of participants’ identities.

6.1 Social Rapport

We clustered each pair in evaluation II on its respec-
tive relationship type as shown in Figure 4. In the parent-
intermediary group, there were four pairs. In the relative-
intermediary group, there were three pairs, and there was
only one pair of where members didn’t have a familial re-
lationship. We measured usage on each relationship type
through three dimensions: (1) the average number of days
per participant; (2) the average number of sessions per par-
ticipant; and (3) the average number of clicks per partici-
pant. We deﬁned the beginning of a new session as when a
user activity is detected while there was no user activity for
the past one hour. If delay between activities is less than
one hour it is then assumed that the last session is still ac-
tive. If a user comes back after one hour has elapsed since
the last detected user’s activity then it is assumed they went
away from the app and now they are coming back for a new
session.

Once members of a pair are together, interaction between
them is initiated. The success of this initiation depends on
the nature of their social rapport within a pair. In existing
work on intermediaries within the context of ICTD, human
relationships play a pivotal role in encouraging or discour-
aging engagement. In our context, we uncovered scenarios
of how the relationship of users within a pair played a signif-
icant role in facilitating or discouraging requests for engage-
ment. For members of a pair with a prior social relationship,
there was an indication of motivation for the two users to
work together. Within these pairs, intermediaries showed
empathy and a sense of ownership on interaction processes,
and believed that the act of helping was for a good cause as
it had an instrumental value to the people they care about.
For instance Lulama (an intermediary from Langa), a 20
years old girl, mentioned that the app was meaningful to
her because she was helping the person she cares about, and
that was her mother. Andile, a 17 years old intermediary
who was part of the study in Philippi, felt that it was his
duty to support his mother as she took care of him since the

forms of motivational sources below.

Sources of Motivation in Beneﬁciaries

The most prominent motivational factor that drove beneﬁ-
ciaries to seek information derived from the app was steps
comparison. Steps comparison was socially constructed as
majority of the beneﬁciaries lived not far from each other. In
cases where beneﬁciaries initiated the negotiation for inter-
action, it was for the purpose of their health and to compare
themselves with other beneﬁciaries. This kind of comparison
is referred to as one form of social comparison in the con-
text of behavior change support system [26]. This kind of
comparison was not implemented in the app but it was insti-
gated by the the existing social network. Some beneﬁciary
users compared themselves to one another, leading to both
social support, relatedness, and competition among beneﬁ-
ciary users. Beneﬁciary users who knew each other before
organized themselves in informal support groups. Whenever
beneﬁciary users met in these informal support groups, they
talked about the steps walked or food they had been eating.

“I used to boss to others in the group like hahaha
[She would giggle to the people she was interacting
with] how many steps did you walk today hahaha. I
am getting there. I tell them I got some encouraging
messages. They would also say ’I got some too’. I
tell them that I walked so many kilometres today.”

—Nokhanyo (a beneﬁciary user), 57yrs, woman,
from Langa

Through these informal discussions, beneﬁciary partici-
pants were encouraging one another. There was also an
indication of improved relatedness among participants. Peo-
ple who were part of those informal support groups felt that
they were more related to each other compared to before
using the app.

“We [with other participants] didn’t communicate so
much before but now we communicate. Most of the
time, we chat about this and we laugh.”

—Nobantu (a beneﬁciary user), 50yrs, woman,
from Langa

“I am close to other people because of the steps. They
would send you messages to ask ‘how many steps did
you take?’. These are people that I didn’t speak to
here. Not to speak to, I mean others that I didn’t
I know them from
have a really relationship with.
here. It is just a hello, hello that’s it. They send me
messages ‘how many steps did you take today? Is this
app working for you?’. There is this lady next door.
She would come to me like ooh ‘how did that thing
work for you and blah blah’. We were communicating
more than before.”

—Ndileka (beneﬁciary user), 35yrs, woman, from
Langa

Competition with others was also partially linked to com-
petition with self of where beneﬁciaries challenged them-
selves by setting goals implicitly (without writing them down).
Goal-setting pushed beneﬁciaries to do more in steps so that
they could beat others. For instance a person would ask her
intermediary about the number of steps they have walked
in a particular day. Upon getting a response from their in-
termediaries they would say that “tomorrow I am going to
walk this number of steps”. But the main objective of setting

Figure 4: Usage in three groups of relationships

day he was born. These are examples of how intermediaries
were reciprocating the beneﬁts of a prior social relationship.
In a pair with no prior social relationship, negotiation for
interaction may not be successful even if one user within a
pair is motivated to engage with the system. For instance
trust and social rapport hindered Anele (a beneﬁciary user
from Langa), a 47 year old woman, from accessing the sys-
tem. We learned during the interviews that her intermediary
was the granddaughter of her landlord, not related to her.

When there was a prior social relationship (i.e. familial re-
lationship), it played part in mediating the success for nego-
tiation of interaction. Either an intermediary or beneﬁciary
user would instigate a conversation that led to interaction
with the wellness app and exchange of information between
an intermediary user and a beneﬁciary user. The phone was
possessed by a beneﬁciary user and if negotiation for inter-
action is successful, the phone is passed from a beneﬁciary
to an intermediary. If interaction was instigated by an in-
termediary, an intermediary would request a beneﬁciary to
provide some information such as what food has been eaten
by a beneﬁciary. Also an intermediary might either view in-
formation inside the app for his or her own consumption or
share that information with a beneﬁciary user. Interactions
instigated by a beneﬁciary user often entailed a request to
the intermediary to help them view certain information. In
this scenario, there were cases where intermediaries’ auton-
omy was violated as beneﬁciaries requested assistance at the
time where intermediaries were either resting or occupied by
other activities. In these cases, a social relationship still had
to play a role in convincing intermediaries to fulﬁl requests
from beneﬁciaries.

Members of a pair with a prior social relationship demon-
strated improved relatedness within a pair compared to be-
fore. They mentioned that they were conversing more often
to talk about what is going on inside the app. The conver-
sation was fun in some of the participants when they made
jokes about what was happening inside the app.

6.2 Motivation in Utilization of the app

Motivational strategies that were implemented in the app
and those that were socially constructed as the result of
engaging with information from the app, played a vital role
in persuading both beneﬁciary and intermediary users who
engaged with the application. These motivational strategies
led to negotiation of interaction. We discuss in detail these

these goals is to have more steps than others. Goal setting
is an important aspect in health behavior change [35].

These ﬁndings suggest the role that activity and diet-
based social comparison can play even in resource constrained
environments. With typical behavior change support sys-
tems from the West, this kind of comparison is always pro-
vided through software functionality. In our system we im-
plemented activity and diet comparison through gamiﬁca-
tion design patterns such as points, leader board, badges,
botanical gardens, and ﬁsh tanks. Through these features,
each pair of users (a beneﬁciary and an intermediary) were
able to make comparisons with other teams. But our exist-
ing gamiﬁcation features appeared to be of less value to ben-
eﬁciary users as they did not really understand the meaning
of motivation strategies provided by gamiﬁcation although
they interacted with those features through intermediaries.
What they valued most was their relationships with other
beneﬁciaries within the context of the community they lived
in.

Motivational Sources in Intermediaries

Each pair of users (an intermediary user and a beneﬁciary
user) formed a team that competed with other teams. Some
intermediaries pushed their beneﬁciary users to walk more
steps or to eat healthy due to two reasons. Firstly, they
cared for the people they were helping. Secondly, it gave
them more points to win the game against other teams. In
cases where intermediaries initiated the interaction, they did
so to encourage beneﬁciaries to do more, so that their pair
would win according to gamiﬁed elements of the web app.
Gamiﬁcation features in combination with a prior social rap-
port made some intermediary users perceive themselves as
partial owners of the information and the value derived from
the system. For instance one participant explained actions
that were carried out by the beneﬁciary she was helping as
theirs.

“When I saw the garden I was like yeah, our garden
is looking beautiful. Lets do more. Lets take more
steps. Lets eat more veges, because it is the veges
and fruits that are important. One time she went to
the clinic in town and she always walks to the clinic.
It is up in town. That day I was motivated. She
took more than four thousand steps. But mostly the
garden. I like the garden. When I see the garden I
say let’s take more steps. Let’s eat more veges.”

—Lulama, an intermediary

Gamiﬁcation features also led to competition between in-
termediaries. One intermediary user explained how the badges
played a role in challenging and making him to compete
with others. Badges were obtained in an incremental pro-
cess. Each badge had requirements that were speciﬁed by
the minimum number of steps that needed to be walked by
a beneﬁciary user, and the number of days a pair had used
the system. Two intermediary participants mentioned how
the badges and competition motivated them to do more with
their mothers The living metaphors such as botanical gar-
dens and ﬁsh tanks triggered social responses from some in-
termediary users. This phenomenon of computing systems
ability to present social cues to environments that trigger
social responses is discussed by Fogg [11]. For instance we
asked one participant what was the size of ﬁsh in his tank
and his response was as follows, “They were medium sized

because I wasn’t really feeding them.” By feeding he meant
recording of meals eaten by his beneﬁciary user.

Although beneﬁciaries were not very concerned with gam-
iﬁcation still intermediaries shared that information with
them, as shown in the following excerpts:

I told her. She said ‘Aha!

“She saw the garden. The ﬁrst day she saw just the
house and brownish [Desert]. She is like ‘What is
this’.
[Expressing dis-
satisfaction]. It must look green and healthy’. And
then she saw the garden again and said ‘It is looking
good.”’

—Lulama, an intermediary

“She doesn’t understand the app. I just tell her that
people are having ones twos threes and she laughs.”

—Lwazi (an intermediary),14 years of age

The above ﬁndings suggest that gamiﬁcation resulted into
a positive user experience for intermediaries.
It also had
more value and meaning to them than for beneﬁciary users.
Most beneﬁciaries did not understand the meaning of gami-
ﬁcation functionality but upon proximate translation of out-
put by intermediaries they also responded positively.

6.3 Perceived Beneﬁts from our BCSS

There were reported perceived beneﬁts by beneﬁciary par-
ticipants. For instance, the process of recording meals led
to cognitive dissonance in one participant. Cognitive dis-
sonance is whereby an individual discovers that their be-
liefs are not consistent to their actions. Oinas-Kukkonen et
al [26] discussed cognitive dissonance as one of the key is-
sues behind persuasive systems. People want their beliefs to
be consistent with their actions. If there is an inconsistency,
then it is likely for them to become motivated to change their
attitude or behavior in order to restore that consistency.

“I think I like a bit everything about the app especially
with food because I used to eat McDonalds. So I have
to think of what I am going to eat ﬁrst. I will think
that I am eating big portions of carbohydrates and
small portions of fruits. So now I have to balance, I
have to eat fruits more than carbohydrates. With me
it helps because now I can drink more water. I can
eat more fruits than I used to.”

—Ndileka, a beneﬁciary

Cognitive dissonance is achieved through self-monitoring
as users see discrepancy between their beliefs and their ac-
tions. The purpose of self-monitoring is to trigger individ-
uals’ consciousness to alter or modify their behavior. This
consciousness is fostered through behaviour recording and
observation. Self-monitoring is a very important aspect in
cognitive behavior therapy. Health self-management pro-
grams usually ask participants to keep records of their activ-
ities, physiological variables and other health-related data;
personal informatics systems can make this process simpler
and easier. [21]

Some participants became more aware of their eating and
walking patterns. For instance one participant described
that she would always try to avoid people’s lifts on her way
to the bus station so that she can walk more steps. If she
stays at home for the whole day then she would make an
eﬀort to go to nearby shops just to buy airtime so that her
pedometer would record more steps.

In other cases intermediary users explained how their ben-
eﬁciary users were controlling their eating habits as the re-
sult of interacting with information derived from the app.
For instance the meal chart from the app helped Nokhanyo
to reﬂect on whether she was consuming meals that could
trigger the spike of her blood sugar level.

“[Nokhanyo] knows that ‘I am eating too much sugar.
Let me lower my sugar by 500 calories in a week.’
Yah it helps her that way. And she is diabetic. So
when she tests herself she sees that she ate too much
of something so she knows that she has to lower it.
There is a chart. There is a plate. She looks at the
plate and says that ‘I have eaten enough veggies but
I need to eat more of this’. She doesn’t eat meat that
much.”

—Lulama (an intermediary)

“It [The app] was really good because my mother was
limiting herself on stuﬀ like pies and fat food. I would
tell her don’t eat this don’t eat that. She wasn’t eat-
ing much vegetables but I was encouraging her to eat
vegetables”

—Lwazi (an intermediary)

The application had a persuasive eﬀect on beneﬁciary par-
ticipants who engaged with it, thus we conclude that the
beneﬁciaries derived value from the information presented
by the BCSS in our context. At the same time, our ob-
servations indicate that some beneﬁciaries would not have
necessarily consumed information from our BCSS, and thus
would not have experienced perceived beneﬁts without the
promptings and interactions of the intermediaries.

7. DISCUSSION

This work was developed based on existing literature of
PHI and BCSS which is predominantly conducted in the
West. Our idea was to test if a PHI works by leveraging ex-
isting intermediated technology use. As we found out during
contextual enquiry, intermediated technology use was com-
mon among aged participants. So our approach attempted
to utilize an existing practice in the context of PHI.

Our ﬁndings uncover social dynamics that are important
in understanding how intermediated interactions can be lever-
aged to foster utilization of behavior change support systems
within family settings. The two important factors to con-
sider are (1) social rapport between an intermediary and a
beneﬁciary as a requirement for persuasion; and (2) diﬀer-
ences in motivation strategies between intermediaries and
beneﬁciaries, we refer to this as parallel persuasion. We dis-
cuss these two factors in detail below.

Social Relationship and Engagement with a BCSS

The motivation strategies may work provided that an inter-
mediary and a beneﬁciary user have a prior social relation-
ship. A prior social relationship makes intermediaries value
the interaction as more meaningful. One of the beneﬁts of
intermediaries valuing the interaction process as meaning-
ful is that we can capitalize on intermediaries to play a role
of persuaders for health behavior change. We observed this
phenomenon in pairs where an intermediary and a beneﬁ-

ciary had a prior social relationship.

“Sometimes she (Lulama) used to shout at me. ‘No
no you didn’t eat that thing. Tell me what you ate in
the morning. I saw you eating this. It seems there is
nothing for fruits, peanuts. You must remind me to
check you!”’

—Nokhanyo (a beneﬁciary user)

“I would tell her don’t eat this don’t eat that. She
wasn’t eating much vegetables but I was encouraging
her to eat vegetables.”

—Lwazi (an intermediary user)

This is an example of how intermediaries with a prior so-
cial rapport can nudge their beneﬁciaries to walk more steps
or eat healthy. Intermediary users can become a source of
In the work by Fogg [10] mentioned
intent to persuade.
in [26], intentions to persuade can come from three sources:
from the people who create or produce interactive technol-
ogy; from people who give access to or distribute the inter-
active technology to others; and from the people themselves
who use or adopt an interactive technology. Intermediary
users fall into the last two categories, facilitating access while
also being adopters of the technology.

Similarly, Ramachandran leverages prior relationships be-
tween community health workers and expectant mothers for
persuasion [29, 30]. Just as our BCSS has aided the in-
termediary in encouraging healthy behaviors on the part of
the beneﬁciary, Ramachandran ﬁnds that the mobile phone
gives credibility to the community health workers (CHWs).
In that case, the prior social rapport is relatively weak, and
the inﬂuence of the CHWs is limited to infrequent visits,
and much of the persuasive agency is given to the design of
the technology. In this case, we leverage familial relation-
ships within the same household, ﬁnding instead that the
persuasive eﬃcacy of the technology is ultimately limited
by the strength of the relationship and frequency of inter-
action between the intermediary and the beneﬁciary, as was
the case with Anele and in many pairs that participated
in evaluation I. Thus, in order to most eﬀectively leverage
intermediaries, prior social rapport is required.

Parallel Persuasion

Prior social rapport itself may not be suﬃcient for sustain-
ability of engagement. Motivation strategies are needed in
conjunction with prior social rapport. Eﬀective persuasion
strategies are important in sustainability of engagement with
a BCSS. Unlike existing persuasive approaches that design
for one user, persuasion in our context is more complex as it
involves both intermediary and beneﬁciary users. Despite of
existing relationships between intermediary and beneﬁciary
users, intermediaries may not always be willing to help reg-
ularly. This might discourage beneﬁciaries and result in dis-
continued usage of the BCSS. Kiesler et al. [18] found out
that some parents became hesitant to seek informal help
from their children after they had encountered negative ex-
periences. We encountered this phenomenon during both
contextual enquiry, and preliminary interviews before eval-
uation II. Some of our participants shared these negative
experiences. For instance, one participant mentioned that
sometimes it is diﬃcult to seek help on using the cellphone
because their kids sometimes get annoyed when they are
constantly asked to help, especially if it the same task from

last time. Therefore, it is important to minimize negative
experiences of beneﬁciaries by increasing engagement of in-
termediaries.

We have the task of persuading intermediaries to share
information with beneﬁciaries, and we also have the task
of persuading beneﬁciaries to change their health behaviors.
From our ﬁndings, we see how persuasion strategies between
intermediaries and beneﬁciaries diﬀer. For a beneﬁciary, the
weight is more on perceived value of the information on
health beneﬁts and informal social comparison with other
beneﬁciaries from the same community. Intermediaries in-
stead put value on game design elements and social com-
parison is within the context of gamiﬁcation. This suggests
that persuasive strategies between intermediaries and ben-
eﬁciaries diﬀer. In our context, intermediaries were young
and most of them had experiences in games. A previous
study on application of gamiﬁcation on product advertis-
ing [4] found out that a prior gaming experience predicts
higher purchasing intentions. However there is a caveat in
utilization of gamiﬁcation among young people. A study by
Koivisto and Hamari [19] found that the usage of a gamiﬁed
system is highly aﬀected by the novelty eﬀect and this is
more apparent on younger users compared to the old ones.
As time passes by younger users tend to get bored with a
gamiﬁed service. Also ease of use of gamiﬁcation tends to
decline with age [19] with young users reporting systems to
be easier to use compared to their older counterparts.

In addition, we have seen from above that intermediaries
can introduce an intent to persuade apart from these in-
formal social comparisons. The persuasion strategy to be
used by each set of user can be examined during analysis of
persuasion context as suggested in PSD [25] and BCSS [26]
models. This will determine of whether the persuasive func-
tionality should be targeted at the intermediary, the beneﬁ-
ciary, or both. To engage beneﬁciaries we can support direct
activity and diet comparison among beneﬁciaries through
the app but implementation of this needs to address issues
of privacy. An application can be conﬁgured with privacy
settings to allow aggregated information of beneﬁciaries to
be kept private or shared with other teams. The aggre-
gated information that is shared by diﬀerent intermediaries
can be clustered in a bar chart to facilitate social compar-
ison. With gamiﬁcation strategies for intermediaries, and
direct comparison by intermediaries we can have persuasion
strategies that cater for the two sets of users.

8. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

We have explored the extent to which we can leverage in-
termediaries within family settings to support utilization of
behavior change support systems (BCSSs) for health. We
presented the social dynamics that one needs to consider
when designing a BCSS for health in the context of inter-
mediated interactions. We also discussed how persuasive
functionality might work when targeting two users, a ben-
eﬁciary and intermediary. Our ﬁndings suggest that it is
feasible to take advantage of intermediated interactions to
support utilization of ICTs in health behavior change inter-
ventions.

This study is limited in generalizability, since we gener-
ated our insights based on a small number of users and it-
erative evaluations. A larger and longer qualitative study
is needed to understand the contextual dynamics of an in-
termediated BCSS in detail. Secondly, it is not known to

what extent gamiﬁcation mediated the intrinsic motivation
of both intermediaries and beneﬁciaries. We will expand on
this in our future work.

9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work would have not been possible without the gen-
erous funding of Centre of Excellence (CoE) and HPI Re-
search School at University of Cape Town. We also thank
our reviewers and shepherd for valuable feedback on the
manuscript.

10. REFERENCES
[1] D. O. Abegunde, C. D. Mathers, T. Adam,

M. Ortegon, and K. Strong. The burden and costs of
chronic diseases in low-income and middle-income
countries. The Lancet, 370(960 Burton
Baraga3):1929–1938, December 2007.

[2] A. T. Ali and N. J. Crowther. Factors predisposing to

obesity: a review of the literature. Journal of
Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes of South
Africa, 14(2), 2009.

[3] E. ˚Arsand, N. Tatara, G. Hartvigsen, et al. Mobile
phone-based self-management tools for type 2
diabetes: the few touch application. Journal of
diabetes science and technology, 4(2):328–336, March
2010.

[4] J. V. Bittner and J. Shipper. Motivational eﬀects and
age diﬀerences of gamiﬁcation in product advertising.
Journal of consumer marketing, 31(5):391–400,
August 2014.

[5] S. Chatterjee and A. Price. Healthy living with
persuasive technologies: framework, issues, and
challenges. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 16(2):171–178, March 2009.
[6] H. Cole-Lewis and T. Kershaw. Text messaging as a
tool for behavior change in disease prevention and
management. Epidemiologic reviews, 9(1):mxq004,
2010.

[7] S. Deterding, D. Dixon, R. Khaled, and L. Nacke.

From game design elements to gamefulness: deﬁning
gamiﬁcation. In Proceedings of the 15th International
Academic MindTrek Conference: Envisioning Future
Media Environments, pages 9–15. ACM, September
2011.

[8] G. D. Dinsa, Y. Goryakin, E. Fumagalli, and

M. Suhrcke. Obesity and socioeconomic status in
developing countries: a systematic review. Obesity
reviews, 13(11):1067–1079, November 2012.

[9] P. Ferreira. Why play? examining the roles of play in

ictd. Aarhus Series on Human Centered Computing,
1(1):12, October 2015.

[10] B. J. Fogg. Persuasive computers: perspectives and

research directions. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
conference on Human factors in computing systems,
pages 225–232. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley
Publishing Co., January 1998.

[11] B. J. Fogg. Persuasive Technology: Using Computers
to Change What We Think and Do., chapter 5, pages
89–120. Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.

[12] D. P. Guh, W. Zhang, N. Bansback, zubin Amarsi,

C. L. Birmingham, and A. H. Anis. The incidence of

co-morbidities related to obesity and overweight: a
systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC public
health, 9(1):1, March 2009.

[13] J. Hamari and J. Koivisto. Social motivations to use
gamiﬁcation: An empirical study of gamifying
exercise. In ECIS, page 105, June 2013.
[14] J. Hamari, J. Koivisto, and T. Pakkanen. Do
persuasive technologies persuade?-a review of
empirical studies. In Persuasive Technology, pages
118–136. Springer, May 2014.

[15] J. Hamari, J. Koivisto, and H. Sarsa. Does

gamiﬁcation work?–a literature review of empirical
studies on gamiﬁcation. In System Sciences (HICSS),
2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on, pages
3025–3034. IEEE, January 2014.

[16] A. Hsu, J. Yang, Y. H. Yilmaz, M. S. Haque, C. Can,
and A. E. Blandford. Persuasive technology for
overcoming food cravings and improving snack
choices. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages
3403–3412. ACM, April 2014.

[17] W. A. Kaplan. Can the ubiquitous power of mobile
phones be used to improve health outcomes in
developing countries? Globalization and health, 2(1):1,
May 2006.

[18] S. Kiesler, B. Zdaniuk, V. Lundmark, and R. Kraut.
Troubles with the internet: The dynamics of help at
home. Human-Computer Interaction, 15(4):323–351,
December 2000.

[19] J. Koivisto and J. Hamari. Demographic diﬀerences in
perceived beneﬁts from gamiﬁcation. Computers in
Human Behavior, 35:179–188, June 2014.

[20] S. Langrial. From digital interventions to behavior
change support systems: Understanding persuasive
systems’ development and evaluation process. In
Proceedings of IRIS, pages 1–16, 2012.

[21] Y. Medynskiy and E. Mynatt. Salud!: An open

infrastructure for developing and deploying health
self-management applications. In Pervasive Computing
Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2010
4th International Conference on-NO PERMISSIONS,
pages 1–8. IEEE, March 2010.

[22] M. Molapo and M. Densmore. How to choose a mobile
phone for an ict4d project. In Proceedings of the
Seventh International Conference on Information and
Communication Technologies and Development, ICTD
’15, pages 48:1–48:4, New York, NY, USA, 2015.
ACM.

[23] M. Molapo and G. Marsden. Software support for

creating digital health training materials in the ﬁeld.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Information and Communication Technologies and
Development: Full Papers-Volume 1, pages 205–214.
ACM, December 2013.

[24] M. Ng, T. Flemming, M. Robinson, B. Thomson,

N. Graetz, C. Margono, E. C.Mullany, S. Biryukov,
C. Abbafati, and S. F. Abera. Global, regional, and
national prevalence of overweight and obesity in
children and adults during 1980–2013: a systematic
analysis for the global burden of disease study 2013.
The Lancet, 384(9945):766–781, September 2014.

[25] H. Oinas-Kukkonen. A foundation for the study of

behavior change support systems. Personal and
ubiquitous computing, 17(6):1223–1235, August 2013.

[26] H. Oinas-Kukkonen and M. Harjumaa. Persuasive

systems design: Key issues, process model, and system
features. Communications of the Association for
Information Systems, 24(1):485ˆa ˘A¸S500, March 2009.
[27] J. Parikh and K. Ghosh. Understanding and designing
for intermediated information tasks in india. Pervasive
Computing, IEEE, 5(2):32–39, April 2006.

[28] E. S. Poole, M. Chetty, T. Morgan, R. E. Grinter, and
W. K. Edwards. Computer help at home: methods
and motivations for informal technical support. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pages 739–748. ACM,
April 2009.

[29] D. Ramachandran, J. Canny, P. D. Das, and

E. Cutrell. Mobile-izing health workers in rural india.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1889–1898.
ACM, April 2010.

[30] D. Ramachandran, V. Goswami, and J. Canny.
Research and reality: using mobile messages to
promote maternal health in rural india. In Proceedings
of the 4th ACM/IEEE International Conference on
Information and Communication Technologies and
Development, page 35. ACM, December 2010.

[31] R. Ram´ırez, B. Parthasarathy, and A. Gordon. From

infomediaries to infomediation at public access venues:
Lessons from a 3-country study. In Proceedings of the
Sixth International Conference on Information and
Communication Technologies and Development: Full
Papers-Volume 1, pages 124–132. ACM, December
2013.

[32] N. Sambasivan, E. Cutrell, K. Toyama, and B. Nardi.

Intermediated technology use in developing
communities. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
pages 2583–2592. ACM, April 2010.

[33] A. Schwartz, M. Bhavsar, E. Cutrell, J. Donner, and

M. Densmore. Balancing burden and beneﬁt:
Non-prescribed use of employer-issued mobile devices.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference
on Information and Communications Technologies and
Development: Notes - Volume 2, ICTD ’13, pages
140–143, New York, NY, USA, 2013. ACM.

[34] K. Steyn, J. Fourie, and N. Temple. Chronic diseases
of lifestyle in south africa: 1995-2005. Technical
report, Cape Town: South African Medical Research
Council, 2006.

[35] V. J. Strecher, G. H. Seijts, G. J. Kok, G. P. Latham,
R. Glasgow, B. DeVellis, R. M. Meertens, and D. W.
Bulger. Goal setting as a strategy for health behavior
change. Health Education & Behavior, 22(2):190–200,
July 1995.

[36] A. Sukumaran, S. Ramlal, E. Ophir, V. R. Kumar,
G. Mishra, V. Evers, V. Balaji, and C. Nass.
Intermediated technology interaction in rural contexts.
In CHI’09 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, pages 3817–3822. ACM, April
2009.

