Lullaby: A Capture & Access System for Understanding 
the Sleep Environment 

Matthew Kay, Eun Kyoung Choe, Jesse Shepherd, Benjamin Greenstein, 
Nathaniel Watson, Sunny Consolvo, Julie A. Kientz 
University of Washington 
{mjskay, eunky, nwatson, jkientz}@uw.edu, 
jesse.david.shepherd@gmail.com, ben@bengreenstein.org, sunny@consolvo.org 

ABSTRACT 
The bedroom environment can have a significant impact on 
the quality of a person’s sleep. Experts recommend sleeping 
in a room that is cool, dark, quiet, and free from disruptors 
to  ensure  the  best  quality  sleep.  However,  it  is  sometimes 
difficult  for  a  person  to  assess  which  factors  in  the  envi-
ronment  may  be causing disrupted sleep. In this paper, we 
present the design, implementation, and initial evaluation of 
a  capture  and access  system,  called  Lullaby.  Lullaby  com-
bines  temperature,  light,  and  motion  sensors,  audio  and 
photos, and an off-the-shelf sleep sensor to provide a com-
prehensive  recording  of  a  person’s  sleep.  Lullaby  allows 
users to review graphs and access recordings of factors re-
lating to their sleep quality and environmental conditions to 
look for trends and potential causes of sleep disruptions. In 
this paper, we report results of a feasibility study where par-
ticipants (N=4) used Lullaby in their homes for two weeks. 
Based  on  our  experiences,  we  discuss  design  insights  for 
sleep  technologies,  capture  and  access  applications,  and 
personal informatics tools.  

Author Keywords 
Sleep,  capture  and  access,  ubiquitous  computing,  health, 
health informatics, personal informatics, lifelogging 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m.  Information  interfaces  and  presentation  (e.g.,  HCI): 
Miscellaneous 

General Terms 
Design, Human Factors 

INTRODUCTION 
Research  has  shown  that  environmental  factors  can  be  a 
major cause of poor sleep quality and interrupted sleep [19], 
which  can  contribute  to  daytime  sleepiness  and  fatigue.  In 
particular, a room that is too warm [23], has improper light-
ing [17],  is  noisy  [3,13],  or  has  poor  air  quality  [29]  can 
negatively impact sleep. While some of these environmen-

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise,
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior
specific permission and/or a fee. 
UbiComp ’12, Sep 5 – Sep 8, 2012, Pittsburgh, USA. 
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1224-0/12/09...$15.00. 

tal factors are observable, others may be subtle or difficult 
to recognize. Thus, individuals who have poor sleep quality 
often have trouble evaluating the cause or severity of their 
sleep difficulties [7]. 

While  clinical  sleep  centers  can  evaluate  an  individual’s 
sleep quality effectively [8], these evaluations do not occur 
in  individuals’  actual  homes.  Thus,  they  cannot  directly 
identify  environmental  factors  that  might  contribute  to  re-
duced  sleep  quality.  Similarly,  commercial  personal  infor-
matics  devices,  such  as  Zeo (http://myzeo.com/)  and  Fitbit 
(http://fitbit.com/),  help  identify  when  a  person  has  had 
poor sleep or when they awaken. The devices generally re-
port  measures  like  the  proportion  of  time  in  bed  actually 
spent asleep (sleep efficiency), when during the night sleep 
has  been  disturbed,  or  the  user’s  sleep  stages  (e.g.,  light, 
deep, or REM sleep) These measures provide some indica-
tion  of  sleep  quality,  but  give  little  concrete  guidance  for 
sleep environment improvement. 

Ubiquitous  computing  technology  that  helps  people  track 
both their sleep habits and environmental factors that affect 
their  sleep  quality  could  help  people  identify  why  their 
sleep was interrupted, not just when. Thus, we have devel-
oped  Lullaby,  an  application  that  includes  a  suite  of  envi-
ronmental  sensors—sound,  light,  temperature,  and  mo-
tion—that helps users assess the quality of their sleep envi-
ronments.  Using  a  tablet  device  kept  by  the  user’s  bed, 
Lullaby displays this environmental data together with data 
from an off-the-shelf sleep tracking device. It aims to help 
people  better  understand  their  sleep,  to  understand  what 
goes  on  in  their  sleep  environment  while  they  are  uncon-

Touch screen
device

Sensor
suite

Data
collection
computer

Figure 1. The Lullaby device concept. The sensor suite has 
multiple sensor pods that can be oriented independently. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
scious, and to help them make improvements in their sleep 
habits. Lullaby opens new possibilities for studying capture 
and  access  of  an  unconscious  experience,  such  as  sleep. 
This creates novel challenges in designing an effective way 
for people  to  access  captured  data  and  ensure privacy. We 
explored  these  issues  through  a  feasibility  study  in  the 
homes of four participants over a two-week period and pre-
sent results of their experiences using Lullaby. 

In the rest of this paper, we describe the design of the sen-
sor  suite,  user  interface,  and  how  Lullaby  can  help  people 
understand  their  sleep  environments.  We  also  describe  our 
feasibility  study  and  discuss  considerations  and  opportuni-
ties  for  future  work.  The  contributions  of  this  research  are 
the  design,  implementation,  and  initial  exploration  of  a 
novel  system  for  capturing  sleep  environment  information 
and providing access to an unconscious experience.  

RELATED WORK 
In this section, we outline related work in the areas of cap-
ture  and  access  and  sleep  tracking.  We  also  describe  how 
Lullaby fits into the space of self-tracking and capture and 
access systems. 

Capture and Access 
There are a range of automated and semi-automated record-
ing technologies under the umbrella of capture and access. 
These technologies aid human memory by recording the de-
tails  of  peoples’  experiences.  Truong  and  Hayes  provide  a 
comprehensive review of this space [28], so for our purpos-
es, we summarize the most relevant work here. 

Lifelogging tools aim to capture audio, video, biological da-
ta, and information on users’ experiences as they go about 
their daily lives—what Truong and Hayes [28] call contin-
uous  personal  capture.  An  example  of  such  a  tool  is  My-
LifeBits [9], which aims to record all digital media, audio, 
and video from a single person’s life and demonstrates that 
such  recording  can  be  done  within  contemporary  drive 
space  constraints.  Also  offering  continuous  recording, 
SenseCam  [12]  is  a  portable  device  worn  around  the  neck 
that records audio and video and has a light sensor, passive 
infrared (PIR) sensor, accelerometer, and GPS (global posi-
tioning  system).  SenseCam  offers  playback  of  audio  and 
images with associated sensor readings and was initially in-
tended for use as a memory aid.  

Contrasting these more general recording approaches, Lull-
aby is intended for use in a specific context: the bedroom. 
We  chose  sensors  to  capture  known  sleep  disruptors.  This 
allows us to categorize some sensor data as good or bad ra-
ther than simply displaying it neutrally. Other work has ex-
plored  specific  contexts  of  use,  such  as  classrooms  [1,11], 
young  children  [14,26],  surgery  [10],  and  meetings  [22]. 
Lullaby is the first capture and access system to explore the 
home sleep environment. 

Unlike continuous personal capture, Lullaby’s intended use 
is not as a memory aid. Lullaby also differs from those sys-

tems  with  more  specific  contexts  of  use  in  both  intended 
use—monitoring  sleep  and  the  sleep  environment—and  in 
that  the  data  captured  generally  does  not  represent  con-
scious human memories or experiences: most of the data is 
captured  while  users  are  asleep.  Lullaby’s  data  represents 
unconscious  experience  and  may  not  benefit  from  users 
having consciously experienced the recorded data they wish 
to search through. This presents new challenges for provid-
ing users with a meaningful frame of reference for access-
ing their data. 

One field with a history of recording subconscious actions 
is  microteaching,  an  instructional  technique  used  to  train 
teachers  [2].  In  this  technique,  teachers  are  shown  video 
playback of their lectures to allow them to more easily iden-
tify errors. Kpanga [18] compared the use of microteaching 
with  and  without  such  video,  finding  that  teachers  who 
were instructed using the video technique scored higher on 
tests  of  instructional  ability.  Video  instruction  allowed 
teachers to see subconscious behaviors they engaged in dur-
ing their lectures (such as hand gestures), making them bet-
ter able to self-improve [18]. This suggests more generally 
the potential of exposing people to previously unnoticed as-
pects  of  their  lives  to  improve  self-understanding.  Lullaby 
explores  and  expands on  this  idea  through  the  capture  and 
access of unconscious experience. 

Self-Tracking for Sleep 
Choe  et  al.  [7]  conducted  an  in-depth  literature  review  on 
technologies  for  tracking  sleep. Here  we  will  highlight  the 
most  relevant  findings.  Many  commercial  products  have 
been developed for tracking one’s sleep, including Zeo, Fit-
bit,  and  SleepCycle  (http://mdlabs.se/sleepcycle/).  These 
tools primarily focus on tracking actual sleep behaviors (i.e., 
sleep  times,  amount  of  time  in  bed,  sleep efficiency,  num-
ber  of  awakenings),  but  not  on  sleep  environment.  While 
Zeo provides a tool for describing environmental disruptors, 
it  relies  on  users’  self-reporting  and  does  not  involve  the 
use  of  automatic  sensing.  Applications  in  this  space  from 
the research community have primarily focused on sharing 
sleep data with a social network [15,27] to help people feel 
connected or for encouraging behavior change. 

Self-tracking  of  sleep  also  falls  into  the  realm  of  personal 
informatics.  In  developing  a  model  for  the  design  and  un-
derstanding  of  personal  informatics  systems,  Li  et  al.  [21] 
distinguished  between  uni-faceted  and  multi-faceted  sys-
tems—those that do or do not combine multiple streams of 
a  user’s  data.  They  noted  that  while  multi-faceted  systems 
are  more  difficult  to  engineer  (echoing  Abowd’s  [1]  point 
that  standard  formats  for  capture  and  access  streams  are 
needed  if  combining  multiple  streams  is  to  be  realized  ef-
fectively),  they  have  great  potential  for  allowing  users  to 
make associations between data. However, in reviewing ex-
isting personal informatics systems, Li et al. note that mul-
tifaceted systems often show each facet in separate visuali-
zations, despite users’ desire to see multiple facets simulta-
neously in order to see the relationships between them [21]. 

 
 
There  is  therefore  an  opportunity  to  explore  how  unified 
visualizations might allow people to better understand asso-
ciations in multi-faceted data collected about them. In look-
ing at uni-faceted data, Li et al. found that users will try to 
make  explanatory  inferences  about  their data  (e.g.,  a  spike 
in  step  count  that  corresponds  to  a  known  event,  such  as 
dancing [20]). However, it is unclear how users might make 
similar  inferences  when  multiple  data  streams  are  shown 
simultaneously  and when  the  recorded  events  were  largely 
unseen by users (because, for example, they were sleeping). 

Li  et  al.  also  note  that  personal  informatics  systems,  to  be 
effective  vehicles  for  behavior  change,  must  strike  a  bal-
ance  between  automatic  and  manual  data  collection  [20]. 
Automating the collection of contextual information has the 
potential to reduce user engagement, but it can also increase 
the usefulness of collected data [20]. 

LULLABY DESIGN 
The  design  of  Lullaby  was  inspired  by  previous  work  in 
understanding opportunities for sleep behavior, the sleep re-
search  literature,  and  in  collaboration  with  clinicians  and 
researchers  affiliated  with  the  University  of  Washington 
Sleep Center.  

Design Requirements 
We  imagine  a  scenario  in  which  a  person  having  trouble 
sleeping might approach their doctor for help. Their doctor 
could loan them a Lullaby device, which they would use for 
2  weeks  (this  duration  is  commonly  used  for  collecting 
baseline  sleep  data,  e.g.  in  treatment  for  insomnia  [24]). 
Throughout the two weeks, this person would be able to see 
feedback  on  their  sleep  quality  and  sleep  environment, 
helping them identify possible sleep disruptors. At the end 
of  the  two  weeks,  they  could  review  their  data  with  their 
doctor, who might recommend changes to their sleep envi-
ronment  or  sleep  habits.  This  last  aspect  of  the  scenario 
makes it particularly important that we consider users’ pri-
vacy  in  the  design  of  Lullaby.  While  notions  of  privacy 
may  differ  culturally,  the  bedroom  is  often  considered  a 
private space [7]. Although the above scenario was our mo-
tivating factor, we note that Lullaby can also have the usage 
scenario  of  being  used  as  a  long-term  lifelogging  tool  for 
people interested in personal informatics. 

In previous work [7], Choe et al. surveyed 230 people about 
sleep behaviors and their attitudes toward sleep technology. 
Results  of  the  survey  identified  temperature,  loud  noise, 
other  household  members,  and  pets  as  common  sleep  dis-
ruptors for respondents. Results also found that the recom-
mendation of optimal bedroom conditions and tracking and 
reviewing  sleep  patterns  over  time  were  among  the  most-
requested features for sleep technology [7]. The sleep litera-
ture  also  discusses  that  a  bedroom  should  be  free  of  light 
and  noise  and  at  a  comfortable  temperature  [19].  While  a 
comfortable range of light, sound, or temperature can vary 
by  individual, the  National  Sleep  Foundation  suggests  that 
sounds  at  40–70  decibels  can  be  disruptive  [23]  and  that 

Figure 2. Lullaby deployed on bedside table. Visible here are 
the touchscreen tablet mounted in a stand for easy access from 
the bed and the sensor box with pivoting sensor enclosures. 
The sensor suite itself is about the size of a bedside lamp. 

temperature should be between about 54–75°F [23]. Abrupt 
changes  in  sound pressure  can  also disrupt sleep [3].  Con-
crete  recommendations  on  light  levels  are  less  clear,  but 
there is a known association between high levels of light—
particularly blue light—and disruptions in circadian rhythm 
[17].  Air  quality  has  also  been  identified  as  a  possible 
source of sleep disruption through an increase in sleep ap-
nea  (interrupted  breathing)  [29].  These  factors  make  good 
candidates for inclusion in a system that aims to character-
ize the quality of the sleep environment.  

Choe et al. found that respondents were most interested in a 
technology form factor that was unobtrusive and that intro-
duced  a  minimum  of  additional  devices  [7],  e.g.,  by  using 
existing  cell  phones.  To  facilitate  tracking  and  reviewing 
over 
to  make  all  data  collected—
environmental  factors,  household  members,  audio/video, 
and sleep tracking data—accessible from a unified user in-
terface to allow users to better understand and make infer-
ences from their data, as recommended by Li et al. [21]. 

time,  we  aimed 

To summarize our design requirements based on the previ-
ous literature and guidance from sleep expert collaborators, 
Lullaby should: 

  Track environmental factors associated with sleep disrup-
tion, such as light, sound, temperature, and air quality 

  Track disruptions caused by others in the household, such 

as roommates, family members, and pets 

  Give recommendations for optimal bedroom conditions 

  Be inexpensive and unobtrusive, possibly by re-using ex-
isting technology (e.g. cell phones) and infrastructure 

  Allow tracking and reviewing of data over time 

  Offer a unified visualization of the various factors influ-
encing sleep and sleep quality itself so that users can un-
derstand their relationships 

 
 
 
We originally included a consumer-grade ($200) air quality 
monitor  that  can  estimate  PM10  (the  quantity  of  airborne 
particulate matter <10μm in size). Higher PM10 is associat-
ed with sleep apnea (interrupted breathing) [29]. However, 
piloting revealed that this unit’s fan is loud enough to dis-
turb some people’s sleep, so we did not include it in our de-
ployment.  In  the  future,  we  may  explore  other  options  for 
estimating air quality measurements, such as running the air 
quality monitor during the day only or by taking municipal 
air quality measurements as a proxy. 

Data Collection Computer 
We use a Linux-based mini-PC designed for quiet operation 
(a Zotac mini-PC) as the data collection computer. The sen-
sor  suite,  webcam,  and  Fitbit  base  station  connect  to  the 
computer over USB. We could not find robust Linux Fitbit 
drivers, so we run the Fitbit software on a Windows XP vir-
tual  machine.  Our  software  pulls  the  Fitbit  data  from  their 
website  and  imports  it  into  our  database.  This  setup  high-
lights a known barrier to building multi-faceted personal in-
formatics  systems  [21,25]:  the  lack  of  standardized  data 
formats  hinders  integration.  Our  approach  allowed  us  to 
quickly  prototype  the  system  without  reverse-engineering 
the  Fitbit  device  itself,  but  would  not  be  suitable  in  a  fin-
ished product. Finally, a background rsync process regular-
ly  uploads  logfiles  from  the  data  collection  computer  to  a 
server over an SSH channel so we can ensure the system is 
running  correctly.  In  case  of  technical  problems,  an  SSH 
tunnel allows us to remotely administer the system. 

Touch Screen Interface 
The touchscreen device communicates with the data collec-
tion computer over Wi-Fi. It allows the user to control the 
recording  state  and  see  current  sensor  readings  (Figure  3), 
explore the data collected on previous nights (Figure 4 and 
Figure 5), and delete recorded data (Figure 6). We replaced 
the  default  Android  home  screen  with  our  software  so  the 
tablet  functions  solely  as  Lullaby’s  interface.  The  tablet  is 
positioned  on  a  stand  next  to  the  sensor  unit  so  it  can  be 
manipulated  much  like  an  alarm  clock,  though  there  is  no 
reason the tablet cannot be used anywhere in the home.  

Usage 
As  per  our  design  requirements,  Lullaby  provides  recom-
mendations of optimal bedroom conditions and allows users 
to review collected data to better understand their sleep en-
vironment.  The  sensor  indicators  on  the  home  screen  give 
recommendations  for  optimal  bedroom  conditions  (Figure 
3).  These  indicators  turn  red  when  current  conditions  are 
outside the recommended range. This may prompt the user, 
for  example,  to  adjust  their  climate  control  if  the  room  is 
too hot or too cool. Lullaby uses the commercially available 
Fitbit  sleep  tracking  device,  which  users  wear  on  their 
wrist. Fitbit requires a button press before and after sleep to 
demarcate sleep periods. Once a new sleep period is availa-
ble, the tablet downloads the sleep and environmental data 
from  the  data  collection  computer.  The  user  can  then 

Figure 3. The home screen, with clock, current sensor state, 
and controls. Each sensor has a sparkline of recent readings, 
colored red if those readings are outside recommended 
thresholds for a good sleep environment. 

  Have privacy protections as a fundamental part of its de-
sign  due  to  the  potentially  sensitive  nature  of  recording 
bedroom activity 

Implementation 
Given the above requirements, we implemented Lullaby as 
a bedside sensor suite controlled by software on an Android 
tablet.  Our  goal  was  to  make  a  device  about  the  size  of  a 
bedside  lamp  that  would  collect  data  with  little  or  no  user 
intervention. Lullaby consists of four components: the sen-
sor  suite,  a  data  collection  computer,  a  commercial  sleep 
tracking device (currently a Fitbit), and a touchscreen tablet 
for control and feedback. 

Sensor Suite 
The sensor suite is contained in a single unit that sits on the 
user’s nightstand and, to be as unobtrusive as possible, has 
no  external  lights.  It  consists  of  several  sensors,  each  of 
which can be oriented independently to best capture its data 
(Figure 2): 

   An infrared (IR) camera, pointed toward the user’s bed, 
takes  a  photo  every  15  seconds.  This  interval  is  an  at-
tempt to balance the usefulness of the data against priva-
cy concerns.  

  Two Passive Infrared (PIR) motion detectors capture dis-
ruptions  caused  by  household  members.  One  of  these  is 
pointed at the bed to detect movement of the participant, 
a partner, or pet, and the other is pointed elsewhere in the 
room, such as at a doorway.  

  Two upward-facing light sensors, with a combined field-
of-view of 180°, are oriented to track daylight and indoor 
lights.  

  A microphone with flat frequency response captures dis-

ruptive noise.  

  A temperature sensor attached to the outside of the sen-
sor base,  close  to bed-level  (assuming  a bedside  table  at 
approximately bed height) records ambient temperature.  

 
 
 
Figure 4. The history screen showing readings from the previous night combined with data from the sleep tracking device. 

Figure 5. Playback of audio and images corresponding to the 
data on the timeline. Touching and/or dragging on the timeline 
scrubs playback. Users can also pinch to zoom in/out on the 
graphs for more fine-grained control of the playback. 

browse  through  their  sleep  periods  on  the  history  screen 
(Figure 4). Touching the graph shows the specific numeri-
cal  readings  taken  at  that  point.  Readings  that  are  outside 
the recommended range are highlighted in red on the graph. 
To give more concrete context, users can play back record-
ed  images  and  audio  corresponding  to  the  data  (Figure  5). 
Due to space constraints, the images and audio are streamed 
from  a  lightweight  HTTP  service  on  the  data  collection 
computer rather than downloaded in advance. 

Privacy Controls 
Lullaby supports three principle forms of privacy controls: 
recording control, targeted deletion, and recent deletion.  

  Recording control refers to the ability of users to turn off 
recording at any time, either of all data collection or just 

Figure 6. The deletion screen (for targeted deletion), showing a 
15-minute block. Tapping on an image enlarges it. Tapping on 
the button in the lower right deletes the entire block. When 
scrubbing the timeline, a single enlarged image is shown to 
improve navigation. 

the camera. This is implemented as two toggle buttons at 
the top-right of the home screen (Figure 3).  

  Targeted  deletion  refers  to  the  ability  of  users  to  selec-
tively delete blocks of recorded data. This is implemented 
through  a deletion  screen  (Figure 6)  that  allows  users  to 
browse and delete data in 15-minute chunks using images 
as reference points. This interface resulted from a need to 
balance three concerns: privacy, the value of the data col-
lected,  and  the  ease  of  fine-grained  targeting  on  a  tablet 
interface. From Choe et al.’s survey of privacy concerns 
in the home [6], we expected most deletion would be tar-
geted at smaller, single events, such as instances of nose-
picking or sexual activity. We chose 15-minute blocks so 
that  most  activities  would  not  consist  of  too  many 
chunks,  but  for  small  activities  (such  as  nose-picking  or 

 
 
 
 
 
changing  clothes)  the  amount  of  extraneous  data  deleted 
would not be too high.  

  Recent  deletion  refers  to  an  option  on  the  main  screen 
where the user can quickly choose to “delete last hour.”  

Sex 

Age 

Dianna  Nathan 

Josh 

Andrew 

female  male 

male 

male 

30-40 

30-40 

20-30 

20-30 

Minimizing Lullaby’s Sleep Disruption 
There are significant challenges to instrumenting a person’s 
sleep environment unobtrusively. Since modern technology 
is  often  the  source  of  the  very  environmental  factors  we 
seek  to  measure—e.g.,  LED  indicator  lights,  computer 
fans—there is some irony in outfitting a person’s bedroom 
with such technology in order to measure those factors. As 
such,  we  took  care  to  ensure  that  our  equipment  does  not 
significantly  increase  light  or  sound  levels  in  participants’ 
bedrooms. 

A number of pieces of equipment used (such as DC adapt-
ers and our data collection computer) have LED indicators 
that  we  were  either  able  to  deactivate  or  tape  over  with 
black electrical tape. In addition, we configured the backlit 
Android  tablet  to  dim  to  its  lowest  brightness  after  30  se-
conds  of  inactivity.  Early  pilot  testing  suggested  the  dim 
setting may also be too bright in a dark bedroom; thus, we 
deactivated  the  default  Android  lock  screen  so  that  users 
can simply push the screen power button to turn the screen 
on  and  off.  To  minimize  sound,  we  used  a  mini-PC  de-
signed  for  quiet  operation.  As  already  discussed,  we  also 
opted to leave out the air quality monitor since its fan was 
deemed too loud in pilot testing.  

FEASIBILITY STUDY 
To  understand  how  Lullaby  would  be  used  in  real  world 
settings  and  to  test  its  feasibility  and  usefulness  as  a  feed-
back device, we deployed Lullaby in the homes of four par-
ticipants. 

Study Design 
The  study  consisted  of  an  initial  interview  followed  by  14 
nights’ use of Lullaby and then an exit interview, all in the 
participants’ homes. This length of time was chosen to mir-
ror the two-week period used to collect baseline data in in-
somnia  treatment  [24].  The  initial  interview  included  a 
standardized  questionnaire  on  sleep  quality  (the  Pittsburgh 
Sleep  Quality  Index  [4])  and  questions  on  demographics, 
sleep habits, and sleep quality. We then conducted a semi-
structured  interview  further  examining  sleep  habits  and 
goals  for  sleep  improvement.  Lullaby  was  installed  at  this 
time, and participants were instructed on its use. A printed 
manual  was  also  left  with  them,  along  with  contact  infor-
mation  for  troubleshooting.  We  gave  participants  a  paper 
sleep diary to verify sleep periods identified by the Fitbit.  

At  the  end  of  the  fourteen  nights,  we  conducted  a  semi-
structured exit interview that explored their experiences us-
ing Lullaby, what data (if any) they found useful, and their 
experiences  browsing  data  and  using  the  privacy  controls. 
The  study  was  reviewed  and  approved  by  our  university’s 
human subjects review board. 

Occupation 

Admin.  Self-

Typically sleeps for  6 h 

Sleep partner? 

PSQI ( / 21 ) 
> 5 ⇒ poor sleep 

No 

8 

employed 

8 h 

No 

5 

Student  Web 
Dev. 

6.5 h 

6.5 h 

Yes 

Yes 

7 

7 

Table 1. Summary of participants’ data from initial ques-
tionnaire. Names have been changed to preserve anonymity. 

We  chose  this  smaller  feasibility  study  rather  than  a  con-
trolled efficacy trial based on Klasnja et al.’s [16] model for 
early  stage  evaluations  of  novel  health  behavior  change 
technologies in HCI. The need for this step is echoed in the 
medical  literature  and  their  recommendation  to  focus  on 
how  technologies  fit  into  users’  lives.  Campbell  et  al.  [5] 
state a need for an “understanding of the components of an 
intervention  and  their  interrelationships”  prior  to  conduct-
ing  efficacy  studies  through  qualitative  testing,  focus 
groups, preliminary surveys, or case studies. Our evaluation 
focused on the feasibility of our system, a potentially inva-
sive monitoring technology for the bedroom, which is often 
a very private space. The intention of this study is therefore 
not  efficacy  (proof  of  which  typically  requires  a  random-
ized  control  trial),  but  to  inform  the  design  and  evaluation 
of future sleep monitoring technology. 

Participants 
We  recruited  our  four  participants  (Table  1)  via  Craigslist 
and  word-of-mouth.  We  primarily  screened  for  a  self-
reported desire to improve sleep, which we feel is appropri-
ate for a feasibility study, and for participants with Internet 
access  at  home.  We  compensated  participants  up  to  $200 
USD  in  gift  cards  in  appreciation  for  their  time,  pro-rated 
based on the number of nights of use.  

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In this section, we describe salient findings from the feasi-
bility  study  and  discuss  their  implications  for  future  re-
search in this space. 

Overall Usage 
In total, we collected data from 59 sleep periods (15 for Di-
anna, 16 for Nathan, 14 each for Josh and Andrew) over 68 
days. Some gaps in continuous use were caused by partici-
pants  forgetting  to  use  one  of  the  sleep  tracking  devices, 
technical  issues,  or  participants  having  other  sleeping  ar-
rangements.  Event  traces  of  participants’  interactions  with 
Lullaby  can  be  seen  in  Figure  7.  From  the  traces,  we  can 
see  that  all users  made  regular use  of Lullaby, particularly 
around  bedtime—the  events  shown  on  these  graphs  occur 
only  through  direct  user  interaction.  In  total,  Dianna  inter-
acted  with  Lullaby  for  164  minutes  over  the  study  period, 

 
 
 
a
n
n
a
D

i

n
a
h
t
a
N

h
s
o
J

w
e
r
d
n
A

d
n
e
g
e
L

Thu

Sun Wed

Sat

Tue

Fri Mon

Thu

Sun

Sun

Tue

Thu

Sat Mon Wed

Fri

Sun

Tue

Thu

Sat

Mon

Wed

Fri

Sun

Tue

Sat

Mon

Wed

Fri Sat

Mon

Wed

Sleep period

Home screen

History screen

Delete screen

Figure 7. Chromograms of usage over the entire study period. 
Shaded areas indicate sleep periods as recorded by sleep 
tracking devices or the diary. Colored lines correspond to ac-
tive use of the tablet on one of the three interface screens. 

Nathan for 53 minutes, Josh for 179 minutes, and Andrew 
for  202  minutes  (see  Table  2  for  interaction  times  broken 
down by screen). 

Dianna, Andrew, and Josh had the most regular use of the 
history screen. Andrew described the process he took to in-
vestigate his data: 

It was fun to go through the data in the morning, and I 
kept on trying to find myself snoring—whenever I saw 
the noise graph jump a little bit I would go to that spot 
and play through. 

Josh  had  a  similar  approach  to  looking  at  playback  sur-
rounding sleep disturbances as reported by the sleep track-
ing device. He noted that he primarily looked at the history 
“to see if it agreed with me on how many times I woke up 
during the night.” Nathan, who made less use of the history 
screen  on  a  regular  basis, noted  “the first  couple of days I 
glanced at it, and realized, oh, I actually need to take some 
time  to  stop  and  study  this,  and  really  look  through,  and  I 
just never managed to make the time to do that.” 

Participants used the environmental sensor feedback in dif-
ferent ways. Surprisingly, the light sensor data was largely 
not  useful  for  any  of  the  participants.  Josh,  Andrew,  and 
Dianna primarily slept when it was dark outside and did not 
notice  significant  light  levels  during  sleep.  Andrew  found 
that  the  light  sensors  did  not  pick  up  some  disturbances, 
such as his phone screen coming on when he received a text 
message during the night. This represents one limitation of 

  Dianna 

Nathan 

Josh 

Andrew 

Screen use time
home=
history=
delete=

164 min 
 53 min 
 35 min 
 75 min 

53 min 
26 min 
26 min 
~1 min 

179 min 
131 min 
 41 min 
  6 min 

202 min 
152 min 
 47 min 
  2 min 

Table 2. Summary of usage 

the current design, as the light sensors are oriented upwards 
to capture overhead light and daylight. 

Dianna found the sound data to be useful in identifying her 
coughing  at  night  and  how  consistently  it  happened.  An-
drew was able to use the sound to find moments of interest, 
such  as  him  or  his  partner  getting  out  of  bed  during  the 
night, although he was not able to find instances of snoring 
as he wanted to (although he noted that he did not snore as 
much as usual: “My partner, who slept here probably 80% 
of  the  time,  said  that  she  never  heard  me  snoring,  at  all. 
That’s unusual for me.”). 

Dianna and Andrew both found that they moved more than 
they  thought  in  their  sleep;  Dianna  expressed  surprise  that 
she  moved  so  much  while  unconscious.  Josh  also  noted  a 
fair amount of movement, but was unsurprised by it as his 
wife has previously told him he moved during his sleep.  

Dianna’s  temperature  data  showed  that  there  were  several 
nights where the room was hotter than the suggested maxi-
mum. Because she did not have air conditioning, she used a 
fan on those nights to cool down. Interestingly, this moved 
the  sound  levels  to  above  the  recommended  threshold,  alt-
hough it was a white noise. Another interesting factor was 
that the temperature sensor does not register the room being 
cooler when the fan is in use, since it only has the effect of 
making  Dianna  feel  cooler.  Thus,  Lullaby's  temperature 
sensing may not be sophisticated enough to account for all 
changes a person makes to their environment. 

Deleting Private Moments 
Use of the deletion functionality varied. None of our users 
deleted  data  from  when  they  were  sleeping.  All  four  users 
except Nathan fell into a regular pattern of turning the log-
ging  on  when  going  to  sleep  and  off  when  they  woke  up, 
mitigating  the  need  to  go  back  and  delete  data.  Dianna 
made  use  of  the  delete  functionality  on  11  separate  occa-
sions, using the “delete last hour” function 9 times and tar-
geted deletion 6 times (sometimes she used both). The bulk 
of her deletions were made at two points: the first occurred 
when she forgot to turn off the recording while not sleeping 
at the start of the study (she waited to start recording for a 
few  days),  and  the  second  occurred  near  the  end  of  the 
study  when  she  looked  for  earlier  instances  where  she 
meant to turn off the recording but forgot. All told, she de-
leted approximately 86 hours of data, but did not delete any 
data recorded during her sleep. By contrast, the other partic-
ipants made little to no use of deletion: Josh deleted a total 
of 45 minutes (three chunks of data using the targeted dele-
tion interface). He deleted this data because he and his wife 

 
 
 
 
were  talking  while  in  bed  and  did  not  realize  that  Lullaby 
was recording: 

In  general,  my  wife  was  always  hypersensitive  to  the 
fact  that  there  was  a  camera  in  the  bedroom…  [She 
said],  “Well,  can  you  not  turn  it  on  for  the  first  ten 
minutes while we’re in bed so I can talk to you without 
being recorded.” 

Like Dianna, this data was outside any sleep period. Neither 
Nathan nor Andrew deleted any of their data.  

In  terms  of  what  was  deleted,  participants  reported  mostly 
being  concerned  about  private  activities  surrounding  (but 
not during) sleep, such as sexual activity, changing clothes, 
or private conversations. This confirms findings from Choe 
et al.’s study on private moments in the home [6] in which 
participants  predicted  that  intimacy  and  self-appearance 
(which  includes  changing  clothes)  were  the  most  sensitive 
activities  they  would  not  want  recorded.  If  other  types  of 
activities reported in Choe et al.’s study occurred but were 
not deleted, it is possible that the data was too overwhelm-
ing—that finding an instance of picking one’s nose, for ex-
ample, is the proverbial needle in the haystack, and the time 
it would take to sift through the entire data set is not worth 
the  small  privacy  invasion.  This  mirrors  other  issues  we 
found  (that  the  data  is  overwhelming  in  general,  and  that 
users would benefit from some higher-level views, summar-
ies, or other navigational tools). If users were given compu-
tational help in finding potentially sensitive moments, such 
as  using  simple  computer  vision  frame  differencing  algo-
rithms, they might find greater use for deletion within sleep 
times.  The  low-resolution  images  captured  by  our  camera 
may also not have been enough for our participants to wor-
ry about smaller private moments. 

Dianna did express a desire for more accurate deletion, stat-
ing that she would like to be able to delete single images ra-
ther than 15-minute chunks in order to preserve data where 
possible.  It  is  possible  that  privacy  concerns  in  our  study 
were  more  prominent,  since  our  participants  knew  that 
whatever data they  did not delete  could be seen  by  the  re-
search  team.  If  Lullaby  was just a  tool  for  personal  use,  it 
may  be  less  necessary  to  have  similar  privacy  controls. 
However, in the case where Lullaby would be used by a pa-
tient with their sleep clinician, the danger of having others 
see their data would again be prominent. It is important to 
note  that  the  focus  of  our  designs  thus  far  is  on  end-user 
feedback, and that sleep clinicians would likely value a dif-
ferent presentation of the data (our experience suggests they 
would  value  high  level  summaries  of  behaviour  and  com-
parisons of data over time, e.g. week-to-week). It should be 
possible to create such summaries while respecting the pri-
vacy of the user. 

Proper treatment of privacy is important when designing an 
application  for  bedroom  use.  Our  goal  was  to  understand 
how  to  acceptably  integrate  capture  and  access  into  a  pri-
vate space to support continued and valuable use, which our 

results  support:  users  were  primarily  concerned  with  and 
only  deleted  data  from  non-sleep  periods,  which  tended  to 
be not useful data for participants. Thus, future versions of 
Lullaby could be designed to automatically delete data be-
tween sleep periods, or record only while the user has indi-
cated that they were sleeping instead of continuously. This 
approach  has  the  added  benefit  of  reducing  the  amount  of 
data storage required. 

Browsing Outside the Bedroom 
Contrary to our initial expectations, use of the tablet inter-
face for browsing sleep data in the bedroom was not univer-
sally seen as a plus by our participants. Dianna, for exam-
ple, chose not to browse her data immediately before or af-
ter  sleep,  but  would  come  back  to  it  at  other  times  of  the 
day.  By  contrast,  Andrew  was  happy  with  the  tablet  inter-
face being in the bedroom, stating that he did not expect he 
would  use  it  elsewhere  in  the  house.  Dianna  and  Nathan 
suggested that being able to browse their data on a website 
would be preferable; Andrew also thought he would like to 
be able to access the data via a website. 

At  the  same  time,  Dianna  considered  use  of  the  tablet  for 
control of the bedside device, such as for turning on and off 
the recording, important. However, she also normally has a 
smartphone  in  her  bedroom.  When  we  suggested  that  the 
smartphone might be an alternative for the Lullaby UI, she 
stated  this  would  be  a  good  idea  so  long  as  she  could 
browse her data on the computer (since, with the tablet, she 
appreciated  the  large  screen  for  looking  at  data).  We  feel 
this might offer a good compromise: limited data browsing 
using  a  phone  at  the  bedside  (primarily  for  control  of  the 
device and checking its status), with more in-depth analysis 
and browsing functionality available on a website. 

Capturing Unconscious Experiences 
While  previous  work  has  looked  at  automated  capture  of 
spontaneous  or  unplanned  events  [12,14],  there  are  addi-
tional  challenges  to  capture  and  access  when  the  events 
captured  occur  while  the  participant  is  unconscious.  When 
capturing  spontaneous  events,  arguably  users  are  aware  of 
the occurrence of such an event as it happens or shortly af-
ter—there  is  no  need  subsequently  to  discover  it.  In  con-
trast, the domain of sleep is one where events of interest are 
not known by users until well after their occurrence—until 
the time at which the user goes looking for such events. As 
a result, a (largely) automated capture process is necessary. 
Users  must  also  sift  through  data  with  little  or  no 
knowledge of what they seek or when it occurred, so help-
ing them discover salient data is very important. 

To  aid  this  discovery,  we  gave  users  a  wider  context  in 
which to view their data by highlighting data that is out-of-
range  (and  therefore  possibly  of  interest)  and  by  showing 
all  collected  data  together,  chunked  by  sleep  period.  Both 
Josh  and  Andrew  used  this  out-of-range  data  to  find  mo-
ments of interest; Josh used out-of-range sleep tracking data 
and  Andrew  used  audio  data,  suggesting  that  this  context 

 
 
was  helpful.  The  play  back  of  sound  and  images  corre-
sponding to the sensor data also helped provide a more con-
crete frame of reference. 

Our  participants  found  this  unconscious  data  compelling. 
As  we  noted  above,  Andrew  and  Dianna  both  found  that 
they moved more than they thought in their sleep (Andrew 
was “startled by how much motion there was”). Prior to us-
ing Lullaby, Dianna was aware that she coughed occasion-
ally during sleep, both because she would sometimes awak-
en coughing and because others had told her. However, she 
found from the Lullaby data that she coughed more than she 
suspected: “I knew... but I didn’t know the extent.” Chronic 
coughing  is  a  symptom  of  sleep  apnea,  a  widely  undiag-
nosed condition largely for the same reasons that motivate 
Lullaby:  its  immediate  symptoms  are  difficult  for  the  suf-
ferer  to  observe.  A  greater  awareness  of  the  extent  of  her 
cough might prompt her to seek a doctor’s advice. 

Nathan  described  his  own  unconscious  experiences—
sleepwalking: 

One really interesting thing I did find is [...] I had two 
sleepwalking episodes two nights in a row and I man-
aged to actually find that, okay this is when I actually 
ended up leaving the bed. 

All users made fairly continuous use of Lullaby. This is un-
usual: as Truong & Hayes [28] note, access of captured data 
is  typically  low  except  in  high-need  cases.  One  reason  for 
this may be that our users all had a self-selected interest in 
improving sleep; we believe this may also be a result of us-
ers’  curiosity  about  unconscious  moments.  However,  it  is 
clear  from  our  results  that  further  work  is  needed  to  help 
users  grasp  these  unconscious  events  through  higher  level 
summary data or other inferences.  

Drawing Inferences from Data 
One of the goals of Lullaby was to help people identify the 
things  that  are  causing disruption  to  their  sleep. Some  dis-
ruptors  might  be  easy  to  see  just  by  looking  at  the  graphs 
and  in  tandem  with  the  audio/visual  stream,  such  as  a  co-
occurrence between awakenings and motion caused by cats 
entering  or  exiting  the  bed;  this  was  also  a  compelling  as-
pect  of  the  data  for  Dianna:  “I  was  curious  about  what 
matched up with what.” However, more subtle causes may 
be difficult to determine just by reviewing the data manual-
ly.  For  example,  a  user  may  want  to know if  they  awaken 
more frequently while the temperature is warmer over a pe-
riod of several nights. With enough captured data, Lullaby 
could help identify such relationships by running statistical 
analyses on the data to determine if there are any significant 
correlations. This type of inference might be useful for oth-
er  types  of  self-monitoring  applications,  such  as  determin-
ing the cause of increases in blood sugar levels for diabetes 
patients or determining causes of headaches for a headache 
diary tool. 

To investigate the potential for higher-level summaries and 
inferences, we followed up with three participants after the 
study ended to present mockups of possible future summar-
ies  (Dianna,  Andrew,  and  Josh).  These  mockups  ranged 
from scatterplots of potentially related factors, to aggregate 
statistics  of  various  measures  (for  example,  the  amount  of 
time  spent  out  of  range  for  each  sensor),  to  one-sentence 
summaries of factors influencing sleep (for example, “Over 
the past two weeks, higher temperature has been associated 
with  worse  sleep”).  All  three  responded  very  positively  to 
the single-sentence summaries. 

For  both  Dianna  and  Andrew  we  were  able  to  populate 
these mockups with their own data pulled from the Lullaby. 
In Andrew’s case, we found a possible weak association be-
tween  temperature  and  sleep  disturbance  (R2=0.2808, 
p=0.0625).  Presented  as  a  scatterplot  with  a  trendline,  he 
found this to be an interesting finding; as a single-sentence 
summary, he said “that would be really cool.” Dianna was 
also  very  enthusiastic  about  one-sentence  summaries,  stat-
ing  that  they  were  the  type  of  overview  of  her  data  she 
would most like to see. 

In comparing one high-level summary of data to the exist-
ing interface, Andrew noted: 

This  would  tell  me  maybe  that  my  restlessness  or  my 
sleep  interrupt  is  coming  from  noise,  but  it  wouldn’t 
tell  me  that  that  noise  is  happening  […]  when  I’m 
snoring. 

This suggests a need to support some kind of drill-down or 
other ways of connecting high-level summaries to the low-
level data in order to further support the kind of data explo-
ration that our participants wanted. 

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
We  have  described  the  design,  implementation,  and  initial 
evaluation of Lullaby, a capture and access system for help-
ing  people  record  and  review  their  sleep  environments  to 
help them identify sleep disruptors. Lullaby combines inex-
pensive  consumer-grade  sensors  with  an  interface  that  al-
lows  users  to  explore  their  sleep  history.  We  have  consid-
ered privacy aspects of the design from the beginning, tak-
ing care to ensure that users can pause collection or delete 
sensitive data. Our current design helps users identify con-
nections  between  sleep  disruptions  and  environmental  fac-
tors. The findings from this study have implications for per-
sonal  informatics,  capture  and  access,  and  sleep  technolo-
gies.  Future  work  will  use  new  designs  based  on  lessons 
learned here and will involve studies with more participants 
to explore efficacy in behavior change and that are longer-
term to explore how it could be used for those interested in 
lifelogging.  One  of  the  co-authors  is  a  sleep  clinician,  and 
we will recruit through his clinic for future studies of effi-
cacy.  These  studies  will  complement  this  initial  work  and 
help validate people’s receptiveness to environmental sleep 
data collection, privacy issues, and the usefulness of Lulla-
by’s  data  and  visualizations.  We  will  also  use  the  sensor 

 
 
and  sleep  data  collected  from  this  study  to  develop  more 
improved  data  analyses,  recommendations,  and  visualiza-
tions. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The  authors  wish  to  thank  Jared  Bauer  for  his  early  assis-
tance with this work. We also thank Jonathan Schooler for 
his  development  work,  Louis  LeGrand  for  his  advice  on 
sensor  programming,  and  Patrick  Kelley  for  his  design  in-
put. We also thank Intel and the Natural Sciences and Engi-
neering Research Council of Canada for providing funding 
for this work. The work was completed at the University of 
Washington and Intel Labs Seattle and was approved by the 
University of Washington Human Subjects Department. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Abowd,  G.  Classroom  2000:  An  experiment  with  the 
instrumentation  of  a  living  educational  environment. 
IBM Systems Journal, (1999), 1-52. 

2.  Allen,  D.W.  and  Ryan,  K.  Microteaching.  Addison-

Wesley Pub. Co., 1969. 

3.  Basner,  M.,  Müller,  U.,  and  Elmenhorst,  E.M.  Single 
and  combined  effects  of  air,  road,  and  rail  traffic  noise 
on sleep and recuperation. Sleep 34, 1 (2011), 11. 

4.  Buysse,  D.J.,  Reynolds,  C.F.,  Monk,  T.H.,  Berman, 
S.R.,  and  Kupfer,  D.J.  The  Pittsburgh  Sleep  Quality 
Index:  a  new  instrument  for  psychiatric  practice  and 
research. Psychiatry research 28, 2 (1989), 193-213. 

5.  Campbell,  M.,  Fitzpatrick,  R.,  Haines,  A.,  and 
Kinmonth,  A.  Framework  for  design  and  evaluation  of 
complex  interventions  to  improve  health.  BMJ  321, 
September (2000). 

6.  Choe,  E.K.,  Consolvo,  S.,  Jung,  J.,  Harrison,  B.,  and 
Kientz,  J.A.  Living  in  a  Glass  House:  A  Survey  of 
Private Moments in the Home. UbiComp 2011, 41-44. 

7.  Choe,  E.K.,  Consolvo,  S.,  Watson,  N.F.,  and  Kientz, 
J.A.  Opportunities  for  Computing  Technologies  to 
Support Healthy Sleep Behaviors. CHI 2011. 

8.  Douglas, N.J., Thomas, S., and Jan, M.A. Clinical value 
of  polysomnography.  The  Lancet  339,  8789  (1992), 
347-350. 

9.  Gemmell,  J.,  Bell,  G.,  Lueder,  R.,  Drucker,  S.,  and 
Wong,  C.  MyLifeBits:  fulfilling  the  Memex  vision. 
ACM Multimedia 2002, 235–238. 

10. Hansen,  T.R.  and  Bardram,  J.E.  ActiveTheatre  –  A 
Collaborative, Event-Based Capture and Access System 
for the Operating Theatre. UbiComp 2005, 375-392. 

11. Hayes, G.R., Gardere, L.M., Abowd, G.D., and Truong, 
K.N.  CareLog:  a  selective  archiving  tool  for  behavior 
management in schools. CHI  2008, 685-694. 

12. Hodges, S., Williams, L., Berry, E., et al. SenseCam: A 
retrospective memory aid. UbiComp 2006, 177-193. 

13. Hume,  K.I.  Noise  pollution:  a  ubiquitous  unrecognized 

disruptor of sleep? Sleep 34, 1 (2011), 7-8. 

14. Kientz,  J.  KidCam:  toward  an  effective  technology  for 
the capture of children’s moments of interest. Pervasive 
Computing, (2009), 115-132. 

15. Kim, S., Kientz, J.A., Patel, S.N., and Abowd, G.D. Are 
you sleeping?: sharing portrayed sleeping status within a 
social network. CSCW  2008, 619-628. 

16. Klasnja, P., Consolvo, S., and Pratt, W. How to evaluate 
in  HCI 

technologies  for  health  behavior  change 
research. CHI  2011, 3063. 

17. Kozaki, T., Kitamura, S., Higashihara, Y., Ishibashi, K., 
Noguchi,  H.,  and  Yasukouchi,  A.  Effect  of  Color 
Temperature  of  Light  Sources  on  Slow-wave  Sleep.  J 
Physiol Anthropol Appl Hum Sci 24, 2 (2005), 183-186. 

18. Kpanja, E. A study of the effects of video tape recording 
in microteaching training. BJET 32, 4 (2001), 483–486. 

19. Kryger,  M.H.,  Roth,  T.,  and  Dement,  W.C.  Principles 
and  practice  of  sleep  medicine.  W.  B.  Saunders  Co., 
Philadelphia, 2000. 

20. Li,  I.,  Dey,  A.,  and  Forlizzi,  J.  Using  Contextual 
Information to Improve Awareness of Physical Activity. 
Engaging Data Forum 2009, (2009). 

21. Li, I., Dey, A., and Forlizzi, J. A stage-based model of 

personal informatics systems. CHI 2010, 557-566. 

22. Lipford,  H.R.  and  Abowd,  G.  Reviewing  Meetings  in 
TeamSpace. Human-Computer Interaction 23, 4 (2008). 

23. National  Sleep  Foundation.  The  Sleep  Environment. 

http://www.sleepfoundation.org/article/how-sleep-
works/the-sleep-environment. 

24. Perlis, M.L., Jungquist, C., Smith, M.T., and Posner, D. 
Cognitive Behavioral Treatment of Insomnia: A Session-
by-Session Guide. Springer, 2005. 

25. Price, B.A., Petre, M., and Rogers, Y. Some Challenges 
in  Activity  and  Sleep  Monitoring 
for  Personal 
Informatics. CHI  2011 Personal Informatics Workshop. 

26. Roy,  D.,  Patel,  R.,  DeCamp,  P.,  et  al.  The  Human 
Speechome  Project.  Symbol  Grounding  and  Beyond, 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2006), 192-196. 

27. Schmidt,  A.  Network  alarm  clock 

(The  3AD 
International  Design  Competition).  Personal  and 
Ubiquitous Computing 10, 2-3 (2005), 191-192. 

28. Truong,  K.N.  and  Hayes,  G.R.  Ubiquitous  Computing 
for Capture and Access. Foundations and Trends in HCI 
2, (2009), 95–171. 

29. Zanobetti,  A.,  Redline,  S.,  Schwartz,  J.,  et  al. 
Associations  of  PM10  with  Sleep  and  Sleep-disordered 
Breathing in Adults from Seven U.S. Urban Areas. Am. 
J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 182, 6 (2010), 819-825. 

 
 
 
