Making  Sense  of  Sleep  Sensors:  How  Sleep  Sensing  
Technologies  Support  and  Undermine  Sleep  Health  
Ruth Ravichandran1, Sang-Wha Sien3, Shwetak N. Patel1,2, Julie A. Kientz3, & Laura R. Pina2,3 
1Electrical Engineering, 2Computer Science & Engineering, 3Human Centered Design & Engineering 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA USA 
{vinisha, elgreco, jkientz}@uw.edu, {shwetak, lpina}@cs.washington.edu 

ABSTRACT  
Sleep is an important aspect of our health, but it is difficult 
for  people  to  track  manually  because  it  is  an  unconscious 
activity.  The  ability  to  sense  sleep  has  aimed  to  lower  the 
barriers of tracking sleep. Although sleep sensors are widely 
available, their usefulness and potential to promote healthy 
sleep  behaviors  has  not  been  fully  realized.  To  understand 
people’s  perspectives  on  sleep  sensing  devices  and  their 
potential  for  promoting  sleep  health,  we  surveyed  87  and 
interviewed 12 people who currently use or have previously 
used sleep sensors, interviewed 5 sleep medical experts, and 
conducted an in-depth qualitative analysis of 6986 reviews 
of the most popular commercial sleep sensing technologies. 
We  found  that  the  feedback  provided  by  current  sleep 
sensing technologies affects users’ perceptions of their sleep 
and encourages goals that are in tension with evidence-based 
methods  for  promoting  good  sleep  health.  Our  research 
the 
provides  design  recommendations  for 
feedback of sleep sensing technologies by bridging the gap 
between expert and user goals.  

improving 

Author  Keywords  
Sleep  tracking,  health  monitoring,  sleep,  sleep  sensing, 
personal informatics, quantified self, behavior change.  

ACM  Classification  Keywords  
J.3. Life and medical sciences: Health. 

INTRODUCTION 
Adequate, restful sleep is as important to one’s well-being as 
a healthy diet and regular physical activity. During sleep, the 
body and brain undergo necessary restorative activities [1], 
and  inadequate  sleep  leads  to  reduced  alertness  and 
drowsiness  [17].  In  the  United  States,  an  estimated  of  50 
million  people  have  poor  sleep  quality  or  have  a  sleep 
disorder such as insomnia, sleep apnea, and narcolepsy [10].  

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for per-
sonal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components 
of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with 
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to 
redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request 
permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2017, May 06-11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA  
© 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4655-9/17/05…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025557 

Despite the pervasiveness of sleep issues, people struggle to 
assess and improve their sleep. Sleep is an unconscious, passive 
activity  and  therefore—unlike  diet  and  physical  activity, 
which  are  difficult  but  possible  to  track  manually  [12]— 
accurately self-tracking sleep manually is often unattainable.  

The  clinical  gold  standard  of  sleep  quality  assessment  is  a 
polysomnographic  (PSG)  study.  This  study  generally 
consists of a single night, clinical evaluation at a sleep clinic. 
The  patient  wears  seven  different  physiological  sensors 
directly on their body [3]. PSG studies are used to diagnose 
sleep-related  disorders, 
(e.g., 
such 
uncontrollable  sleepiness)  or  sleep  apnea.  PSG  studies  are 
accurate, but expensive. They require monitoring in a highly 
controlled and unnatural setting, and patients find the sensors 
uncomfortable  to  wear  even  for  a  single  night.  These 
limitations  make  it  difficult  to  establish  a  baseline  of 
behavioral sleep patterns over time.  

as  narcolepsy 

Commercial  sleep  sensing  technology  for  use  at  home  is  a 
growing industry [25]. These technologies have the potential 
to overcome the limitations of PSG studies while providing 
long-term, low-cost, and accurate representations of people’s 
daily  sleep  patterns  in  their  natural  and  comfortable  home 
environment.  The  popularity  of  these  commercial  sleep 
sensors is promising in that they indicate that people have an 
interest  in  understanding  and  obtaining  good  sleep  health. 
However,  literature  has  not  examined  whether  commercial 
devices  effectively  sense  sleep  quality  and  provide  people 
with  meaningful  feedback.  Thus,  we  set  out  to  answer  the 
following research questions: 

•   How are people currently using commercially available 
sleep sensors and making sense of feedback they provide? 
•   What  aspects  of  sleep  sensing  and  feedback  either 
facilitate  or  potentially  undermine  people’s  ability  to 
understand their sleep and achieve good sleep health?  
•   What aspects of current sleep sensor technology designs 
are in line with evidence-based methods of understanding 
and promoting good sleep health?  

To answer these questions, we collected a dataset consisting 
of  interviews  with  5  sleep  experts,  surveys  with  87  and 
interviews  with  12  people  that  have  used  sleep  sensing 
devices, and 6986 consumer product reviews from the most 
widely used commercial sleep sensing devices. We focused 
on sleep sensing technologies that use physiological sensing, 
such  as  body  movement,  breathing  rate,  or  heart  rate  to 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6864 
 
estimate  sleep  quality  and  excluded  manual,  self-reported 
sleep tracking methods such as sleep diaries. We find that:  

•   Self-trackers  using  sleep  sensing  technologies  often 
develop  broken  mental  models  about  what  commercial 
sleep sensors are able to actually sense, how they work, 
lack  of  algorithmic 
and  are  frustrated  with 
transparency in sleep sensing technologies. 

the 

•   Self-trackers 

find 

it  distracting  when 

feedback 
emphasizes unconscious aspects of sleep, such as time in 
sleep  stages,  over  aspects  of  their  sleep  they  have  the 
ability to control and improve. 

•   Self-trackers  can  better  understand  and  improve  their 
overall  sleep  habits  when  feedback  from  sleep  sensors 
focuses on duration, timing, and making connections to 
modifiable behaviors and sleep hygiene. 

Our  findings  examine  the  state  of  sleep  sensing  feedback 
from the perspective of users’ needs and sleep experts. From 
our results, we derive design recommendations that consider 
users’ needs and connect them to evidence-based strategies 
for improving sleep quality. A set of these recommendations 
provides new avenues to improve sleep sensing.  

RELATED  WORK  
In this section, we review literature on designing applications 
for  sleep  sensing  and  improving  sleep  health  as  well  as 
research on helping users understand health-related data. 

Designing  for  Sleep  Tracking  and  Sensing  
In the HCI community, there has been a recent trend focusing 
on novel computing-based interventions for sleep. In 2011, 
Choe et al. conducted a literature review and formative study 
to  examine  design  opportunities  for  sleep  from  an  HCI 
perspective  [7].  The  authors  identified  people’s  strong 
interest in lowering the barriers to track their sleep and the 
factors that affect their sleep. The authors also stressed the 
importance of supporting long-term sleep tracking to identify 
trends to help people create personalized sleep goals.  

Building upon these opportunities, researchers have explored 
varying ways of capturing and providing feedback on aspects 
related to sleep health. SleepTight [8] is an application that 
lowers  the  barriers  of  manually  tracking  sleep  and  helped 
users make sense of behavioral factors that could be affecting 
their  sleep.  ShutEye  [2]  is  a  peripheral  display  on  a 
smartphone’s  active  wallpaper  which  provides  timely 
guidance on when it is best to engage in activities that could 
impact  sleep,  such  as  consuming  caffeine  or  exercising. In 
SleepCoacher,  Daskalova  et  al.  [13]  explored  the  use  of  a 
personalized,  automated  self-experimentation  system  for 
understanding  sleep  health.  Finally,  Lullaby  captures 
environmental  factors  (e.g.,  temperature,  light,  audio,  and 
motion)  in  relation  to  sleep  data  captured  from  a  Fitbit. 
Lullaby provides comprehensive information of users’ sleep 
environment.  This  information  allows  users  to  learn  about 
environmental factors that may affect sleep [20].  

Sleep sensing can lower the burden of manual sleep tracking 
and improve the accuracy of sleep inference at home. Toss 

'N' Turn investigated the accuracy of sleep sensing using data 
from seven sensors found in smartphones and found it was 
possible  to  predict  aspects  of  sleep  quality  to  between  81-
83% accuracy [28]. DoppleSleep uses off-the shelf 24 GHz 
radar  modules  to  monitor  vital  signs  and  body  movements 
and  uses  that  information  to  infer  sleep  stages  and 
differentiate  between  sleep  and  wake  times  [30].  The 
contactless  nature  of  DoppleSleep  obviates  the  need  to 
instrument the user’s body with sensors and lowers the cost 
of clinical sleep studies.  

Toss 'N' Turn and DoppleSleep have focused on improving 
sensing, but not on the feedback that would be provided to 
users. Liu et al. conducted an investigation of the usability 
and acceptability of commercial sleep sensing devices [27]. 
They  found  there  are  a  number  of  issues,  including 
discomfort,  battery  life,  and  inability  for  users  to  modify 
data. Our analysis confirms many of Liu et al.’s findings. We 
build upon this prior work by focusing on the feedback sleep 
sensors provide and how users interpret and take action on 
the feedback.  

Making  Sense  of  Health  Data  
Connected to the design of self-tracking technologies is the 
study of how people make sense of their self-tracked health 
data  and  why  people  abandon  self-tracking  when  they 
struggle to make sense of said data [14, 22]. Previous work 
has examined how to represent and visualize data such that 
it is persuasive and offers insights that can lead to behavior-
change  [11,15,33].  One  such  way 
improve  data 
representation is to clearly convey its uncertainty [21].  

to 

Uncertainty  is  a  point  of  frustration  for  users  of  physical 
activity inference technologies. Users of these technologies 
have to cope with activity inference and measurements that 
are prone to error. Consolvo et al. identified that users react 
negatively when fitness trackers incorrectly infer a particular 
physical activity and consequently, do not give users credit 
for  said  activity  [11].  Kay  et  al.  found  that  there  is  a 
disconnect between a users’ perception of their weight, the 
precision capabilities of their scale, and clinical relevance of 
weight  deviations  [22].  Kay  et  al.  further  found  that  an 
accurate  understanding  of  weight  fluctuation  is  associated 
with greater trust in the scale itself. Work by Yang et al. [34] 
examined how self-trackers view the inaccuracy of sensor-
driven  step  count  inference  and  the  process  in  which  self-
trackers  engage  to  assess  the  accuracy  (or  lack  thereof)  of 
their  fitness  devices.  These  studies  demonstrate  users  care 
about 
taking 
the  accuracy  of  sensor-driven 
accuracy into account when they assess their data.  

tracking, 

We  extend  such  work  by  examining  the  strengths  and 
weakness of sleep sensing feedback from the perspective of 
users  and  sleep  experts.  Our  results  indicate  that  sleep 
sensing  enables  or  interferes  with  making  sense  of  sleep 
quality.  Our  discussion  provides  design  recommendations 
which connect user needs with evidence-based strategies for 
improving  sleep  quality,  while  still  taking  into  account  the 
limitations  of  sleep  sensing  technology.  These  design 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6865guidelines  can  improve  sleep  sensing  technology  and 
provide new avenues in sleep sensing research.  

DATA  COLLECTION  &  ANALYSIS  METHODS  
To  understand  the  state  of  sleep  research  and  the  needs  of 
people using sleep sensing devices to track their sleep, we 1) 
interviewed  sleep  experts  and  reviewed  the  literature  on 
sleep  research,  2)  analyzed  consumer  product  reviews  of 
sleep sensing devices, 3) deployed an online survey, and 4) 
interviewed a subset of survey respondents. In this section, 
we describe our process and analysis methods.  

Interviews  with  Sleep  Experts  
To gain an understanding of the factors contributing to sleep 
health, we conducted a literature review of sleep research and 
interviewed five experts in the field of sleep medicine (E1-
E5).  E1 is a Neurology professor and board certified sleep 
specialist.  E2  is  a  professor  in  Psychiatry  &  Behavioral 
Science, co-director of a sleep research center, and editor of 
a major sleep research journal. E3 is a sleep researcher in a 
department  of  Family  and  Nursing.  E4  is  a  professor  in  a 
department  of  Family  and  Child  Nursing  and  focuses  on 
pediatric  sleep.  Finally,  E5  is  a  pediatric  psychologist  and 
sleep researcher. 

they  provide.  These 

Experts were familiar with commercial sleep sensors and the 
feedback 
interviews  helped  us 
understand  experts’  perspectives  on  how  sleep  sensing 
technologies address sleep health needs and the practices the 
experts  establish  with  patients  who  use  sleep  sensing 
technologies  to  track  their  sleep.  During  the  interview, 
experts were asked to comment on feedback examples and 
discuss  how  they  use  patient-generated  sleep  sensing  data. 
We analyzed the sleep expert interviews with support from 
the sleep literature to identify themes focused on maintaining 
and improving sleep. 

available 

commercially 

Reviews  of  Sleep  Sensing  Products    
We  collected  and  analyzed  product  reviews  from  the  most 
widely-used 
sensing 
technologies to gather a user perspectives on sleep sensing 
feedback.  We  gathered  reviews  from 
three  sources: 
Amazon.com,  iTunes  Store,  and  Google  Play  Store.  Our 
inclusion  criteria  consisted  of:  1)  smartphone  apps  using 
phone  sensors  (e.g.,  accelerometer  and/or  microphone),  2) 
dedicated sleep sensing devices, or 3) fitness trackers which 
also sense sleep.  

sleep 

For  smartphone  apps,  we  analyzed  reviews  from  the  4 
highest-rated apps from the iTunes Store and the 5 highest-
rated  apps  from  Google  Play.  We  selected  reviews  in 
decreasing order of word count (e.g., longest reviews first), 
stopping once we felt we reached data saturation. For iTunes 
reviews,  we  reached  data  saturation  at  280  word  count, 
analyzing  475  reviews  out  of  a  total  of  2000  possible 
reviews.  For  Google  Play  reviews,  we  reached  data 
saturation at 500 word count, analyzing 377 out of a total of 
14581  possible  reviews.  Combining  both  sources,  we 
analyzed 852 app reviews.  

From  Amazon.com,  we  collected  reviews  from  dedicated 
sleep  sensing  devices.  These  are  sensors  that  are  placed 
under the mattress (e.g., Beddit, Withings Aura), clipped on 
the sleeper’s pillow (e.g., Sense with Sleep Pill), or placed 
on the nightstand (e.g., S+). We analyzed all 683 reviews for 
these five dedicated sleep devices. Also from Amazon.com, 
we collected reviews from the top four suggested wearable 
fitness trackers with sleep sensing functionality: Fitbit One, 
Fitbit HR, Jawbone Up3, and Misfit Shine. We only included 
fitness tracker reviews containing the word ‘sleep’. This led 
to 3234 Fitbit One, 4298 Fitbit HR, 893 Jawbone Up3, and 
78  Misfit  Shine  reviews  to  analyze.  Similar  to  our  data 
saturation process for the smartphone app reviews, we read 
reviews  in  decreasing  order  of  word  count,  analyzing  data 
until  we  felt  we  reached  data  saturation.  These  reviews 
tended  to  be  longer  than  the  smartphone  app  reviews.  The 
three  authors  coding  this  dataset  reached  saturation  at 
different word counts for some of the devices. In total, we 
analyzed 2113 Fitbit One, 2452 Fitbit HR, 808 Jawbone Up3, 
and all 78 Misfit Shine reviews, totaling 5451 fitness tracker 
reviews. Combining all review datasets, we analyzed a total 
of 6968 reviews (Table 1).  

iPhone  apps  

Android  
apps  
Amazon  re-­
views  

Gender  
Age  

Currently  
tracking?  
Tracker  type  

Gender  
Age  

Currently  
tracking?  
Tracker  type  

App  Reviews  (6986  reviews)  
Smart  Alarm  Clock  (87),  SleepBot  (171),  MotionX  
(119),  Sleep  Cycle  (98)  

Sleep  Bot  (138),  Sleep  Cycle  (84),  Sleep  Tracker  (1),  
Sleep  as  Android  (116),  Sleep  as  Android  Paid  (38)  
Dedicated  devices  (683):  Sense  with  Sleep  Pill  (290),  
Beddit  (99),  Withings  Aura  (215),  S+  (79);;  
Fitness  Trackers  (5451):  Fitbit  One  (2113),  Fitbit  HR  
(2452),  Misfit  Shine  (78),  Jawbone  Up3  (808)  

Survey  Demographics  (87  people)  
Women  (50),  Men  (37)    
min  18,  max  73,  mean  33.6,  median  31    
18-­23  (12),  24-­29  (27),  30-­39  (28),  ≥40  (22)  
tracking  (60),  discontinued  (29)  

smartphone  app  (3),  fitness  tracker  (56),  dedicated  
device  (3),  Other  (12)    

Interview  Demographics  (12  people)  
Women  (8),  Men  (4)  
min  21,  max  44,  mean  31.8,  median  31.5    
18-­23  (1),  24-­29  (4),  30-­39  (4),  ≥40  (3)  
tracking  (9),  discontinued  (3)  

smartphone  app  (18),  fitness  tracker  (9)    

Table 1. We collected data from four sources: interviews of sleep 
experts, app store and Amazon reviews of sleep sensing devices, 
a survey of people who currently use or have used sleep sensing 
devices, and follow-up interviews with survey respondents. 

Online  Survey  
The themes identified from the expert interview data and the 
review dataset informed the list of questions to survey self-
trackers using sleep tracking technologies. The 29-question 
survey focused on: 1) reasons why people track their sleep, 
2)  which  sleep  sensing  devices  people  use  and  why  those 
devices, 3) the type of information people wanted to collect, 
4) how people make sense of the feedback from sleep sensing 
technology,  and  5)  how  people  connect  data  to  their  sleep 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6866  
  
  
  
  
quality.  Questions  were  a  mix  of  open-ended,  Likert,  and 
multiple  choice.  We  recruited  by  posting  on  social 
networking sites, online message forums, and through a sleep 
blog. To incentivize participation, respondents were entered 
into  a  drawing  to  win  one  of  five  $20  USD  Amazon  gift 
cards. We gathered a total of 87 responses (demographics in 
Table 1).  

Semi-­Structured  Interviews  
Survey respondents had the option to consent to be contacted 
for  an  in-depth  follow-up  interview.  We  contacted  all  46 
respondents  that  consented.  We  interviewed  the  12  which 
replied  to  our  request  (demographics  in  Table  1).  We 
conducted interviews over the phone or in person. Interviews 
lasted  between  16  to  30  minutes.  With  consent  from 
interviews. 
participants,  we  recorded  and 
Interview  questions  were  based  on  respondents’  survey 
answers  and  were  intended  to  triangulate  and  add  depth  to 
our findings from the survey, app reviews, sleep literature, 
and  interviews  with  experts.  Five  interviewees  had  been 
diagnosed  with  a  sleep  disorder  and  three  had  stopped 
tracking. We compensated interview participants with a $25 
USD Amazon gift card.  

transcribed 

Analysis  
Our analysis consisted of an iterative affinity diagramming 
process with 6 steps to analyze our triangulated dataset [4]. 
In  Step  1,  we  analyzed  expert  interview  data  and  the 
literature. We identified 7 themes focusing on sleep hygiene, 
modifiable  behaviors,  experts’  perspectives  on  how  sleep 
sensing  feedback  can  help  their  patients  address  sleep 
concerns,  and  how  patients  and  physicians  use  feedback 
provided  by  sleep  sensing  devices.  In  Step  2,  we  analyzed 
the  product  review  dataset,  which  generated  64  themes.  In 
Step 3, we created our survey based on the themes generated 
from  the  two  previous  steps.  In  Step  4,  we  analyzed  the 
survey  data  and  merged  it  with  the  themes  identified  from 
the product review dataset (i.e., Step 2). In Step 5, we applied 
the  7  themes  from  the  expert  data  to  the  themes  generated 
from  the  survey  and  review  dataset,  but  kept  themes 
reflecting user practices and challenges. This step trimmed 
our themes 64 to 30. Based on these themes, we created our 
interview protocol to gather deeper insights. Finally, in Step 
6,  we  integrated  the  interview  data  to  identify  higher  level 
themes presented in the results. For every step of the analysis 
that  required  affinity  analysis,  the  data  was  split  between 
three  authors.  Each  author  analyzed  their  subset  of  the 
dataset. We then came together to merge, discuss, and iterate 
on themes.  

BACKGROUND  ON  SLEEP  
We now summarize the findings from our literature review 
on sleep and what constitutes health sleep. We explain what 
is  sleep,  how  sleep  quality  is  clinically  assessed,  and 
summarize evidence-based strategies to improve sleep. We 
use the terminology defined in this section in the remainder 
of  the  paper  to  discuss  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  the 
current state of commercial sleep sensing feedback.  

What  is  Sleep?    
Typically, there are two main stages which we cycle through 
when we sleep: Rapid Eye Movement (REM) sleep and Non 
Rapid Eye Movement (NREM) sleep. Three-quarters of our 
sleep  is  comprised  of  NREM  sleep,  which  can  be  further 
broken down into three stages: Stage 1, which is also known 
as light sleep, Stage 2, which is a deeper stage of sleep where 
one becomes disengaged from their surroundings, and Stage 
3, which is the third and final stage is the deepest sleep. REM 
is characterized by rapid eye movement and rapid, irregular, 
and shallow breathing. These stages occur unconsciously and 
people cannot control the patterns through which they cycle 
through  the  stages  or  how  many  hours  they  spend  in  a 
particular sleep stage.  

Sensing  Sleep    
In a clinical sleep assessment setting, the golden standard is 
a polysomnography (PSG) study. For a PSG study, patients 
stay overnight at a sleep lab and sleep while wearing at least 
seven  physiological  sensors.  These  sensors  include:  an 
electroencephalogram  (EEG,  used  to  sense  brain  waves), 
electrooculography  (EOG,  used  to  track  eye  movements, 
electromyography (EMG, used to capture electrical activity 
produced  by  skeletal  muscles),  pulse  oximeters,  and 
microphones  [23].  The  data  captured  from  these  sensors  is 
used  to  classify  and  identify  sleep  stages.  PSG  studies  are 
used to diagnose sleep-related disorders such as sleep apnea, 
restless leg syndrome, and teeth grinding. Using a standard 
protocol, an entire night’s worth of data is manually analyzed 
in  30  second  intervals  by  a  trained  sleep  technician  to 
identify sleep stages [3]. PSG is completed to assesses people 
with  sleep-related  disorders.  It  is  generally  not  conducted 
with people who have poor sleep quality.  

In  non-clinical  settings,  a  wearable,  accelerometer  based 
sensor,  known  as  an  Actigraph,  has  become  a  popular, 
clinically validated tool for continuous sleep tracking [31]. 
Patients wear an Actigraph to help identify wake-up, sleep 
times,  and  the  amount  of  movement  throughout  the  night. 
The data captured by Actigraphs are available to clinicians, 
but data or feedback is not accessible to patients for their own 
personal use.  

Commercial  sleep  sensing  is  becoming  readily  available. 
Devices have the potential to help people learn and monitor 
their  sleep  outside  of  a  clinical  setting.  These  sensing 
technologies  use  accelerometers,  heart  rate  monitors, 
breathing  rate,  and  microphone  sensors  to  infer  sleep. 
However,  these  technologies  have  not  been  clinically 
validated, and their accuracies compared to the gold standard 
are  not  made  public  by  the  companies  who  sell  them.  For 
example, Montgomery-Downs et al. compared the accuracy 
of  Fitbit  and  ActiWatch  against  a  PSG  study  [29].  The 
authors 
that  Fitbit  and  ActiWatch  differed 
significantly on recorded total sleep time, both between each 
other and compared to PSG. Therefore, the sleep medicine 
community  is  concerned  that  commercial  sleep  sensing 

found 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6867technologies  are  providing  inaccurate  feedback  on  sleep 
stages and quality.  

Defining  Sleep  Quality  
In addition to sleep stages, the data captured from the PSG 
study  is  used  to  assess  the  following  measures:  sleep 
efficiency (the ratio of total sleep time to time spent in bed), 
sleep  latency  (the  duration  from  bedtime  to  the  onset  of 
sleep),  arousal  index  (number  of  awakenings  after  sleep 
onset), and other metrics to assess sleep apnea [23]. These 
measures  help  physicians  diagnose  sleep-related  disorders. 
On their own, they are insufficient to assess sleep quality for 
people wanting to track their sleep long-term or to diagnose 
behavioral sleep disorders, such as insomnia. 

In addition to the metrics explained, sleep quality assessment 
requires  considering  routines,  as  well  as  behaviors  before 
going to sleep and after waking up. For example, to improve 
sleep quality, sleep experts and our literature review suggest 
users  assess  sleep  habits  and  adopt  modifiable  behaviors 
[18].  Modifiable  behaviors  are  behaviors  that  people  have 
control  to  act  on,  which  include  examples  such  as:  (1) 
keeping  one’s  bedroom  cool  and  dark;  (2)  maintaining  a 
regular bedtime and wake time every day, even on weekends; 
and (3) avoiding large late-night meals. A second and related 
concept is sleep hygiene, which refers to behaviors, habits, 
and  environmental  factors  that  can  be  adjusted  to  promote 
good sleep quality [32]. Examples of sleep hygiene include 
avoiding caffeine later in the day, exercising regularly, and 
establishing a relaxing bedtime routine [18,32]. Addressing 
modifiable  behaviors  and  sleep  hygiene  are  the  first  two 
methods sleep clinicians use when patients complain about 
poor sleep quality.  

A second component to assessing sleep quality is subjective 
self-assessment.  SATED  is  a  framework  that  uses  five 
dimensions  to  measure  subjective  sleep  quality  [5].  The 
name of the framework is an acronym that stands for: 

•   Satisfaction:  the  subjective  assessment  of  “good”  or 

“poor” sleep 

•   Alertness: the ability to maintain attentive wakefulness 
•   Timing: the placement of sleep within the 24-hour day 
•   Efficiency: the ease of falling asleep and returning to sleep 
•   Duration: the total amount of sleep obtained per 24 hours 

SLEEP  SENSORS  AS  FACILITATORS  
Sleep sensing feedback provides awareness, motivates users 
to  prioritize  sleep,  helps  improve  sleep  habits,  and  helps 
people  with  sleeping  disorders  collaborate  with  their 
physicians to better manage their condition. In this section, 
we  discuss  the  strengths  of  sleep  sensing  feedback  and 
opportunities to improve. 

1 We refer to ‘users’ as product reviewers and survey and interview 
participants. We use RXX to refer to a quote from the review da-
taset, SXX for the survey responses, and IXX from the interview 
responses. The expert data will be referred by E [1-5]. 

Promoting  Awareness  about  Sleep  Health  
Inadequate  sleep  is  the  most  common  sleep  issue  in  the 
United States [17]. Experts in our study agreed, explaining  

that  sleep  is  a  low  priority  for  people:  “I  don't  think  that 
people  pay  much  attention  to  sleep  until  they  have  a 
problem” (E3)1. All experts in our study said sleep sensing 
technologies can create awareness of the importance of sleep 
in  typically  healthy  people:  “I  don’t  think  sleep  hits  their 
radar unless someone actually shows them saying look, you 
are not getting a lot of sleep” (E4). 

Just  from  the  sheer  availability  of  consumer  sleep  sensing 
technologies,  people  have  started  to  utilize  these  emerging 
technologies  to  learn  more  about  their  sleep  habits.  83.9% 
(73/87) of our survey respondents and a majority of online 
reviewers  considered 
themselves  healthy,  were  very 
interested  in  understanding  their  sleep,  and  discussed  the 
benefits  of  having  access  to  information  about  their  sleep. 
This provided users with information they were previously 
unaware of: “First useful observation was that I'll never get 
7 hours of sleep if I only spend 6 hours in bed (i.e., I thought 
I was going to bed earlier than I really was)”	  (S117). This 
type  of  feedback  motivates  users  to  prioritize  sleep:  “I've 
drastically improved my sleep habits just by knowing that I 
was sleep deprived. I didn't know this was a problem but I 
was consistently getting less than 3 hours sleep a night. Now 
I'm over 6!” (R142, Fitbit Charge) 

Facilitating  Adoption  of  Healthy  Sleep  Habits  
In  addition  to  increasing  duration,  sleep  quality  plays  an 
equally vital role in health and well-being. To improve sleep 
quality, one must address modifiable behaviors. Sensors that 
capture environmental factors such as acoustical noise, room 
temperature, and ambient light help users identify potential 
environmental  factors  that  may  be  impacting  their  sleep. 
R146 (Sense) says “... After realizing my apartment was too 
bright, I added curtains to darken the room.” With respect to 
sleep  hygiene,  feedback  representing  sleep  duration  and 
sleep interruptions over time helps people better understand 
the impact of irregular sleep schedules. I11 says, “… being 
able to look at the last couple of days and be like, … It's more 
important  to  stay  on  a  regular  schedule  so  that  you're  not 
throwing  yourself  out  of  whack  every  couple  of  days  by 
staying up until three one day and then trying to go to bed at 
10 the next. The Fitbit gave me kind of a quantified view into 
my sleep schedule.” 

Compared to other health conditions, sleep quality is highly 
subjective. The number of hours, modifiable behaviors, and 
changes in sleep hygiene to improve sleep quality may vary 
for every person. From using sleep sensing technology, S131 
discovered that: “I tend to operate on about half the amount 
of  sleep  as  other  people.”	  The	  feedback  provided  by  sleep 
sensing  technologies  helped  users  understand  how  many 
hours  they  need  to  feel  rested,  thus  providing  a  more 
objective measure: “I sleep well (barely any restless sleep) 
but only sleep for 5 hours. I'm still rested, though” (S116).	  
Although people believe it is important to prioritize sleep and 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6868taking proactive steps to address sleep quality, they also have 
their own beliefs and metrics on sleep. Personal beliefs can 
be  carefully  examined  by  incorporating  a  self-assessment 
framework. The SATED framework can be used to identify 
the quality of a person’s sleep and personalize what adequate 
sleep means to a specific user. 	  

Managing  Sleep  Disorders    
or  Chronic  Conditions  that  Affect  Sleep  
Feedback from sleep sensing also has the potential to manage 
sleep disorders. This data can help experts work with patients 
to  identify  and  manage  patients’  sleep  conditions.  Sleep 
sensors can improve assessment and screening. Currently, to 
assess  sleep,  patients  self-track  their  sleep  to  report  on  the 
five dimensions of the SATED scale: satisfaction, alertness, 
timing,  duration,  and  efficiency  (i.e.,  ease  of  falling  asleep 
and returning to sleep). E1 says, “I think whenever we have 
somebody comes in with a sleepiness complaint, we always 
want  to  get  their  sleep  schedule  to  get  a  rough  idea  as  to 
whether or not they're sleep deprived.” The data provided by 
sleep  sensors  have  the  opportunity  to  provide  longitudinal 
data for the five dimensions for the SATED scale and assess 
if  the  sleep  issue  is  a  chronic  condition  or  just  poor  sleep 
habits: “If it's accurate, I think it (a sleep sensor) can help 
identify if a sleep problem is present and really help parse it 
out between, is the problem not enough sleep? or is there a 
problem with the sleep quality itself?” (E1). 

Because  PSG  studies  take  place  in  a  clinic,  they  do  not 
represent  a  patient’s  natural  sleep  environment.  They  are 
therefore not well-suited to study non-physiological disruptors 
of sleep. Experts discussed the importance of understanding a 
patient’s  environment,  how  it  impacts  people’s  sleep,  and 
type  of 
how  home  sleep  sensing  can  provide 
information: “… the advantage of these devices is that they're 
more ecologically valid because they're measuring sleep in 
the  patient's 
they're 
measuring it over a multiple of nights. Those are two huge 
advantages of this over sonography in the lab … You're in a 
strange sleep environment,  you're  hooked  up  to  all  of  these 
equipment…” (E1).  

typical  sleep  environment,  and 

this 

Sleep  sensing  feedback  can  help  patients  determine  the 
effectiveness  of  a  treatment  for  a  particular  sleep  disorder, 
such  as  using  a  CPAP  (Continuous  Positive  Airways 
Pressure)  machine  for  sleep  apnea.  Experts  stated  that 
patients struggle to adhere without longitudinal data on the 
effects  of  the  treatment:  “Is  the  treatment  working? 
Something  beyond  their  subjective  sense  of  whether  or  not 
they're  better,  but  some  objective  data  to  show  that  their 
sleep  quality  is  better”  (E1).  Connecting  sleep  with 
treatment effectiveness is crucial, especially since over time, 
patients’  motivation  to  adhere  to  treatment  decreases:  “… 
they forget what it was like before, they get uncertain as to 
whether  or  not  they're  better.  The  device  might  be  able  to 
increase that certainty to motivate ongoing compliance with 
treatment”  (E1).  For  patients  using  a  CPAP  machine  to 
prevent  sleep  apnea,  sleep  sensing  feedback  helps  them 

determine if they are frequently moving throughout the night 
and if they need to adjust their CPAP machine: “… My Fitbit 
One allows me to monitor how well I sleep and how often I 
wake  up,  so  if  my  apnea  ever  worsens  and  I  need  an 
adjustment  to  the  settings  on  my  CPAP,  I  will  know  right 
away”  (R1946,  Fitbit  One).  Furthermore,  people  with 
chronic  conditions  wanted  to  share  the  data  from  sleep 
sensors  to  better  understand  their  prognosis:  “I  think  just 
really being able to go back to, say, my endocrinologist and 
my sleep doctor and say, ‘Look it. Here's a pattern of restless 
legs.  In  this  particular  phase  of  my  menstrual  cycle,  my 
restless  legs  is  more  intense  or  less  intense,  so  maybe  we 
need to adjust the pharma, or we need to adjust other aspects 
of treating my legs and treating my sleep disorder based on 
where I am in the month’” (I4).	   

Related  to  I4’s  comment  above,  people  track  sleep  to  find 
correlations between sleep and their other health conditions, 
not  only  track  to  manage  sleep  disorders:  “I  had  prostate 
cancer and have a frequent urination problem. I wanted to 
know how many times that I got up as well as deep and light 
sleep”  (S56).  In  cases  where  the  treatment  for  a  condition 
involved medication, users wanted to monitor the effects of 
medication  on  sleep:  “…it's  especially  helpful  because  it 
helps  me  track  a  side  effect  of  a  medication  I'm  tracking 
(insomnia)  to  help  inform  decisions  on  whether  or  how  to 
change the medication.” (S75). Later in the paper, we present 
opportunities to support scientific self-experimentation. 

SLEEP  SENSORS  AS  BARRIERS  
Although sleep sensing devices provide useful and objective 
feedback  that  is  beneficial  to  users,  our  analysis  identified 
areas  of 
incorporate 
improvements  and  opportunities 
to  sleep  sensing  feedback. 
evidence-based  strategies 
Feedback from the sleep sensors tends emphasize estimating 
the number of hours users spent in various sleep stages and 
assessing  sleep  quality  using  computed,  single-point 
measures  such  as  Sleep  Efficiency  or  Sleep  Score.  Sleep 
efficiency is the ratio of total sleep time to time spent in bed 
[3].  However,  variations  in  hardware  sensitivities  result  in 
small movements classified as “restlessness”. This results in 
variations  in  computed  sleep  efficiency  scored  across 
devices. Furthermore, the algorithms used to compute these 
values are proprietary and not made available to the public.  

As  discussed  in  our  background  section,  people  cannot 
voluntarily control the number of hours spent in a particular 
sleep stage. Current feedback tends to focus on these sleep 
stages. or neurotypical people, a breakdown of the time spent 
in  the  different  sleep  stages  is  not  helpful  feedback  for 
improving sleep quality. The focus on sleep stages leads to 
users  developing  inaccurate  mental  models  of  how  current 
sleep  sensors  work  and  what  it  means  to  get  good  quality 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6869Figure 1. Percentage of survey respondents who believed their sleep quality was related to various sleep metrics 

sleep. Feedback on sleep stages distracts users from focusing 
on adapting modifiable behaviors to improve sleep hygiene, 
which  really  could  have  a  positive  impact  on  their  health. 
SATED’s  dimensions  combine  subjective  perspectives  of 
sleep  quality  such  as  Satisfaction  along  with  objective 
measures such as Sleep Efficiency. These dimensions provide 
a more holistic representation of sleep quality [5].   

Inconsistency  in  Sleep  Quality  Inference  
Emphasizing  the  SATED  dimensions  of  sleep,  E5  said:  “I 
think  for  a  healthy  night’s  sleep,  the  person  is  getting 
adequate sleep for their developmental needs and has a low 
number of interference with that sleep during the night. They 
wake feeling fairly well rested and satisfied with their night's 
sleep. They are able to maintain good alertness during the 
day and not feel fatigued.” Experts noted that there is a trait 
variability to sleep and some measures are very specific to 
each  person,  “Some  people  can  …  have  poor  quality  sleep 
and not really feel many ill effects from it. Other people can 
have just minor decrements in those sleep factors that have 
a pretty big impact on sleep quality (E1).” Satisfaction, one 
of  the  five  SATED  dimensions,  is  highly  subjective  and 
specific to each person. This measure can be gathered from 
getting users’ own perception of their sleep quality and how 
rested they feel on waking up.  

To provide feedback to users about their sleep, commercial 
sleep sensors often focus on determining objective measures 
such  as  sleep  efficiency,  sleep  latency,  and  the  different 
stages  of  sleep.  Commercial  sensors  tend  to  focus  less  on 
subjective  measures.  However,  the  focus  on  objective 
measures led many users to have a broken mental model of 
what  sensors  can  infer  and  what  information  is  useful  to 
address sleep concerns. R2066 (Fitbit One) says, “The lack 
of explanation as to the formula/algorithm that lead to the 
results  are  very  maddening.  What  does  the  94%  effective 
sleep rating actually mean?” 

Focusing  solely  on  a  single  objective  value  such  as  sleep 
score  distracts  users  from  adopting  modifiable  behaviors 
proven to help improve sleep, such as maintaining a regular 
bedtime  and  wake 
identifying 
environmental  factors  such  as  ambient  light  or  sound  that 
may be disrupting their sleep. Users were, instead, focused 
on trying determine what sleep score to target. “I would also 
love some benchmark information or links to what is a good 
target for sleep efficiency?” (R565, smartphone app). 

time  every  day  or 

Mismatch  between  score  and  user  perception  
The confusion on the feedback is further compounded when 
the sleep scores do not correlate with users’ own perceptions 
of sleep satisfaction. R7 (Beddit) reports, “After using it for 
a  week  during  which  I  slept  as  poorly  as  I  normally  do,  I 
earned not one, but two perfect 100 sleep scores as well as a 
99 last night, where I tossed and turned and woke twice from 
nightmares.”  R7  felt  they  had  slept  badly  for  three  nights, 
but the feedback reflected a high sleep score and therefore a 
good  night’s  sleep,  which  was  opposite  of  what  was 
expected. Users in this situation struggled to determine what 
the sleep score and percentages represented. 

In  our  survey,  50%  of  our  respondents  agreed  or  strongly 
agreed that their sleep score or sleep efficiency was related 
to their sleep quality (Figure 1). However, these scores may 
not  necessarily  provide  users  an  accurate  picture  of  their 
sleep  quality  because  sleep  efficiency  scores  vary  on 
hardware  specification  and  sensing  sensitivities.  “The 
problem  is  that  it  is  nowhere  near  sensitive  enough  on 
normal  and  way  too  sensitive  on  sensitive  setting.  I  had  a 
restless night the night I had it on normal, waking multiple 
times,  and  it  recorded  15  minutes  of  restless  sleep  and  no 
wake times. The next night, on sensitive, I had much better 
sleep, and it recorded only 3 1/4 hrs. of sleep and the rest 
waking or activity!” (R10, Fitbit One). 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6870 
 
One benefit of sleep scores and sleep efficiency numbers is 
the  potential  to  provide  longitudinal  feedback  over  several 
weeks. E1 suggested, “I would focus more on the trends than 
I would on just the night to night scores. They [consumers] 
need to approach it with a dose of skepticism and then follow 
the  trends  more  than  the  night  time  score.”  Another 
suggestion  from  E5  was,  “There  needs  to  be  something 
tracked alongside that, whether it's their subjective rating of 
sleep quality or their sleep habits. Something that actually is 
an  actionable  item.  I  don't  think  just  giving  someone  a 
number, like you slept 440 minutes last night, is enough of 
the right kind of feedback to lead to changes.” 

Placing  Undue  Emphasis  on  Sleep  Stages    
Reviewers  of  sensing  devices  place  high  value  in  sleep 
sensing  devices  that  can  infer  sleep  quality  based  on  sleep 
stages. One review said: “The only thing it doesn't really do 
that my mom's Jawbone does, is that it doesn't tell me about 
my  sleep  cycles  (stage  1/stage  2/REM  etc.)  it  just  tells  me 
when  I'm  asleep,  awake,  and  'restless'”  (R784,  Fitbit 
Charge). Survey respondents reflected the same perspective, 
considering sleep stages to be representative of sleep quality 
(see Figure 1). More than 60% agreed or strongly agreed that 
time spent in specific stages such as REM, deep was related 
to sleep quality. I8 said, “The Jawbone … gave me light sleep 
and  the  deep  sleep  separation  and,  of  course,  the  awake 
states.  Since  I  didn't  have  many  awake  states  during  the 
night, which was good, I only pretty much had the amount of 
hours that I was having light sleep and deep sleep … What I 
eventually  understood  was  that  I  was  having  not  enough 
deep sleep”.  

The  sleep  experts  we  interviewed  believe  people  generally 
misunderstand  the  relationship  between  sleep  quality  and 
sleep  stages.  “I  think  that  for  a  layperson,  that  word  deep 
implies more restful sleep and so I would imagine that's the 
only  word  that  they  would  think  about…”  (E5).  Although 
there  has  been  evidence  that  time  spent  in  specific  sleep 
stages, such as REM, helps with memory consolidation [16], 
the focus on sleep stages has two concerns: 

First,  to  accurately  determine  sleep  stages  such  as  REM,  a 
device  would  need  to  capture  brain  waves  and  eye 
movement,  as  is  done  in  a  clinical  PSG  study.  Experts  are 
skeptical  of  the  accuracy  of  sleep  stages  inferred  from  a 
combination of movement, breathing, and heart rate data as 
a  proxy  to  EEG  and  EOG  data,  which  commercially 
available  products  currently  provide.  Like  sleep  scores, 
every sleep sensing device has its own proprietary algorithm 
to determining sleep stages. Sleep users began to notice the 
inconsistencies:  “I  tracked  a  few  days  of  sleep  with  both 
devices  and  the  results  are  in  the  Fuse  vs  UP3  Sleep 
comparison… It is very apparent that they have completely 
different ideas about what light and deep sleep means” R195 
(Jawbone  Up3).  Figure  2  shows  R195’s  comparison  of  the 
sleep  stage  inference  provided  by  two  different  sensors  on 
the  same  night.  MioFuse  inferred  R195  had  spent  64%  of 
sleep time in deep sleep, while Jawbone Up3 inferred 16.5% 

of sleep time in deep sleep. Similarly, participants that had 
previously  completed  a  PSG  sleep  study  noticed  the 
difference  between  what  the  clinicians  reported  and  what 
their devices were reporting. I8 said: “The band gave me too 
much deep sleep when compared with the actual exam …” P8.	  

Second, there is limited research on how a person can take 
actionable steps towards affecting the number of hours spent 
in  a  particular  sleep  stage.  “I'm  not  aware  of  anything 
necessarily that can increase REM sleep. Many medications, 
particularly  psychiatric  medications,  can  affect  sleep 
architecture  sum.  What  the  effect  that  a  medication  would 
have  on  any  given  individual  is  there's  probably  some 
variability  to  that”  (E1).  The  feedback  on  sleep  stages 
provided by commercial sensors promotes incorrect mental 
models on what these sensors can infer and how these stages 
actually  impact  sleep  quality.  “It's  …  a  lot  of  useless 
feedback…  what  I  would  like  to  see  more  clearly  is  really 
that the lay public understands there is no scientific basis for 
these numbers” (E5). Experts instead want feedback to focus 
on  issues  people  actually  have  control  over,  such  as  sleep 
hygiene and modifiable behaviors. “That feedback might be 
if you're not getting a lot of deep sleep, they might interpret 
that as a poor night of sleep and think that their getting bad 
sleep. Again, it doesn't really lend itself to being actionable; 
so  what  are  they  supposed  to  do  about  that  necessarily?” 
(E5).  Experts  expressed  a  desire  to  help  users  understand 
what these sensors can actually infer about sleep: “I think it 
[feedback from the device] needs to be scaled back into what 
we can expect them [users] to realistically understand and 
do something about” (E5).  

Making  unscientific  correlations  based  on  sleep  stages  
In line with previous work [34], some users conducted a self-
experiments on their sleep and make correlations from their 
findings.  However,  the  focus  on  sleep  stages  led  users  to 
make unscientific correlations between daily behaviors and 
specific sleep stages. For example, R8 correlated deep sleep 
with  a  late  meal:  “Last  night,  I  had  a  late  meal  and  that 
wasn’t  the  best  for  me…  I  wake  up  this  morning  and  see 
that… I got very little [deep] sleep compared to my average 

Figure 2. R195’s comparison of one nights’ sleep stage 
feedback from two separate devices. (Left) Mio Fuse infers 
64% of sleep spent in deep sleep. (Right) Jawbone Up3 in-
fers 16.5% deep sleep (shown as 1hr 22mins out of 8hrs 
and 14mins). 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6871 
…. I always knew it was bad to have a big meal before bed, 
but now I actually have the data to back it up” (R8, Jawbone 
Up3). For good sleep hygiene, avoiding large late night meals 
is recommended, but correlating with deep sleep stage might 
scientifically  incorrect.  Users  may  not  have  understood  is 
that  a  big  meal  might  cause  restless  sleep,  and  therefore 
cutting  down  on  large  meals  might  have  allowed  them  to 
have less restlessness, leading to better sleep quality overall.  

In some cases, such inferences can sometimes lead to actions 
that  can  be  potentially  detrimental  to  health.  For  instance, 
users  like  R168  (Zeo)  experimented  with  medication  in  an 
attempt to increase the duration of REM: “I can also see a 
day-to-day trend of how the iodine supplement I have just re-
started  is  helping  my  sleep.  It  has  increased  my  deep  and 
REM and I feel better, even though my overall sleep time is 
not that much more.”  

Like  Yang  et  al.,  our  data  reflects  that  users  were  making 
unscientific correlations and lacked support to conduct self-
experiments  that  can  identify  causal  inferences  [34].  Users 
want the means to self-experiment: “I basically want a sleep 
tracker  that  has  three  or  four  variable  knobs  …  ‘You  had 
three  really  good  nights'  sleep,  and  here  are  the  variables 
that you played with’” (P4). Many people  who  track  sleep 
additionally wanted to add notes to add context to their sleep 
to  help  assess  what  is  affecting  their  sleep.  “I  had  some 
theories about what was causing me to sleep well or not and 
I had to track those in a different app. I would have been nice 
to track them in the same [sleep app] to help me see trends”	  
(S86). These types of information not only provide context 
to  people’s  sleep  quality,  but  can  also  help  address  the 
subjective  aspect  of  sleep  quality:  “[I  would  like  to  track] 
Number of sleep hours and quality [to] cross-check against 
what I feel during the day” (S177). 

Supporting self-experimentation as a scientific process will 
help  users  better  identify  personal  triggers  affecting  their 
sleep  [13].  Our  data  reflects  that  many  people  who  track 
sleep  want  to  test  a  hypothesis  they  have  about  their  sleep 
quality. Users want to test a variety of factors that could be 
affecting  their  sleep  and  related  to  sleep  hygiene.  These 
their 
include  medication, 
environments,  and  other  aspects  of  their  health  including 
time within a menstrual cycle.  

stress,  diet,  aspects  of 

DISCUSSION  AND  DESIGN  RECOMMENDATIONS  
Our findings show that sleep sensors increase awareness in 
prioritizing  sleep  and  help  users  address  modifiable 
behaviors and their sleep hygiene. On the other hand, current 
feedback focuses on sleep metrics people do not have control 
to  directly  change  (e.g.,  time  in  sleep  stages)  and  this 
distracts  users  from  focusing  on  aspects  they  have  control 
over  that  improve  sleep  health.  We  now  provide  design 
recommendations  for  on 
the  feedback  sleep  sensing 
technology can provide to users. Our guidelines draw from 
our  results,  and  connect  to  evidence-based  strategies  that 
focus  on  sleep  hygiene,  modifiable  behaviors,  and  the 
SATED  framework  for  good  sleep  quality.  Our  design 

recommendations aim to mitigate the tension between user-
driven  goals,  expert  recommendations,  and  the  sensing 
limitations of current commercial sleep sensing technologies. 

Include  Subjective  Sleep  Quality  Assessment  
Sleep quality is inherently subjective. A poor night’s sleep 
for  one  person  can  be  satisfactory  and  rested  sleep  for 
another  person.  Furthermore,  the  effects  of  a  poor  night’s 
sleep  vary  from  person  to  person.  Sleep  quality  self-
assessments is often used by clinicians to assess the severity 
of  sleep-related  issues  [6].  We  recommend  that  subjective 
self-assessments be incorporated as part of the analysis that 
sleep  sensing  technologies  execute  to  calculate  people’s 
sleep  quality  for  a  given  night.  To  assess  subjective  sleep 
quality, we recommend incorporating the five dimensions of 
the  SATED  framework,  such  as  Satisfaction  and  Alertness 
with  more  objective  measures  such  as  Efficiency,  Timing, 
and  Duration.  Incorporating  users’  subjective  assessment 
should  also  be  integrated  into  algorithms  that  personalize 
feedback  or  calculate  a  sleep  score.  Furthermore,  self-
assessments should be used to learn and assess which types 
of  modifiable  behaviors  worked  best  in  helping  a  user 
improve their sleep over time.  

Contextualize  Sleep  Quality  with  Journaling  
The  current  state  of  feedback  does  not  support  long-term 
perspectives on sleep trends. We recommend sleep technologies 
support long-term visualizations of bed time, wake time, and 
sleep duration. Long-term visualizations can provide a richer 
and  more  holistic  view  on  variability  compared  to  daily 
feedback focused on sleep stage. Viewing long-term trends 
will  help  users  address  aspects  of  sleep  hygiene  related  to 
maintaining a consistent bedtime and wake time. 

We also recommend allowing users to log major life events 
such as job changes, the birth of a newborn, or the start or 
end of college semesters. These logs will help users identify 
events in their daily life that might be impacting their sleep. 
Integrating long-term trends and life logs will contextualize 
lifestyle  changes  and  help  users  to  assess  and  focus  on 
aspects  that  positively  or  negatively  affect  their  sleep. 
Contextualizing  sleep  data  and  supporting  sleep  self-
assessments  will  also  help  physicians  diagnose  what  is 
affecting  a  patient’s  sleep.  Physicians  and  sleep  clinicians 
could use longitudinal sleep data, self-assessments of sleep, 
and information on sleep routines to gather a more holistic 
view of a patient’s health.  

Focus  on  Actionable  Feedback  
We  find  that  feedback  helps  users  connect  their  daytime 
behaviors,  pre-bedtime  behaviors,  and  environmental 
conditions of their bedrooms to their sleep quality, which in 
turn  helps  them  act  accordingly.  This  confirms  previous 
research  [9],  [20].  To  help  people  draw  meaningful 
conclusions from sleep data, designs need to develop ways 
of presenting feedback to users beyond correlational graphs. 
Moreover, support for more systematic tests such as through 
self-experiments  [13,19],  can  make 
less 
frustrating  than  simple  trial  and  error.  Systems  can  allow 

this  process 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6872people  to  test  behaviors  such  as  the  timing  of  caffeine 
consumption or installing noise and light blocking curtains. 
Reviewing  these  experiences  will  help  people  identify  the 
impact  of  that  change  on  their  sleep  duration,  timing,  or 
satisfaction. 

Finally,  technologies  can  promote  good  sleep  health  by 
delivering  timely  behavior  change  suggestions  or  actions, 
such  as  turning  off  electronic  devices  close  to  bedtime  or 
automatically  dimming  lights  at  night.  To  provide  these 
suggestions,  experts  recommended  a  two-week  period  of 
data  collection  before  offering  personalized  suggestions. 
This two-week period would serve as a baseline to understand 
daily behaviors.  

Give  Feedback  in  Ranges,  not  Single  Point  Values    
Currently, sleep scores and sleep efficiency are presented as 
a precise, single point value, such as 92%. Clinically, these 
metrics are calculated using brain waves to identify the onset 
of  sleep  and  arousal.  However,  current  sleep  sensing 
technologies infer these same metrics based on physiological 
signals  such  as  body  movement,  breathing,  and  heart  rate. 
Physiological signals cannot currently accurately differentiate 
between awake in bed and asleep in bed. This substitution in 
sensing modality introduces a certain level of inaccuracy.  

We recommend reporting sleep scores in ranges rather than 
single  values  to  avoid  false  precision.  Similar  to  users’ 
perceptions  of  changes  in  weight  by  several  pounds  [22], 
daily fluctuations in sleep scores or sleep efficiency does not 
imply drastic changes in sleep quality and only causes users 
to  be  unnecessarily  concerned.  To  improve  quantitative 
metrics,  systems  need  to  incorporate  self-assessments  on 
sleep  satisfaction  using  clinically  valid  frameworks  like 
SATED. Systems can provide sleep score ranges instead of 
a  single-point  value,  based  on  sleep  sensing  data  and  self-
assessments.  These  ranges  will  focus  on  overall  sleep 
quality, move away from making sleep quality a single value. 
Doing  so  will  embrace  the  inherent  sensing  inaccuracies 
without compromising on the metrics.  

Increase  Transparency  in  Formulae  and  Algorithms    
Our  results  indicate  that  users  have  broken  mental  models 
about  how  sleep  sensing  technologies  work.  Publicly 
documenting the algorithms and formulae used to calculate 
sleep score in a straightforward manner can bridge the gap 
between sensing capabilities and users’ expectations. Work 
by Lim et al. [26] suggests explanations can help improve the 
intelligibility of context-aware intelligent systems. This can 
be  applied  to  sleep  sensing  technologies  to  equip  users  to 
better interpret sleep feedback results in a meaningful way.  

Sleep  quality  feedback  may  appear  to  have  an  understated 
role  in  affecting  people’s  health-related  decisions.  In  a 
culture  where  people  are  encouraged  to  do  more  with  less 
sleep, presenting users feedback that misleads them to make 
unscientific  correlations  could  lead  to  practices  which  are 
potentially detrimental to health. Therefore, we believe that 
tool  makers  have  an  ethical  and  social  obligation  to  avoid 

accidentally  promoting  false  precision  and  to  avoid  non-
actionable  feedback  that  steers  users’  focus  away  from 
making  healthy  choices.  Users  should  to  be  able  to  act  on 
their  own  health  and  use  sleep  sensing  technologies  to 
experiment  and  determine  what  makes  them  healthy.  We 
hope tool makers will continue to innovate on new metrics 
for  sleep  health  beyond  what  is  currently  possible  in  the 
clinic.  We  also  want  to  emphasize  that  new,  experimental 
features, such as new sleep measurements, should be clearly 
labeled as experimental. Tool makers should ensure tools are 
designed  primarily  with  the  shared  goal  of  improved  sleep 
health, rather than marketing new features which may not be 
scientifically validated. 

CONCLUSION  &  FUTURE  WORK  
technology  provides  people  with  rich 
Sleep  sensing 
information  about  their  sleep.  These  technologies  help 
people  learn  about  their  sleep  habits  and  how  to  improve 
sleep health by providing feedback on their sleep. However, 
certain  types  of  feedback  lead  users  to  develop  broken 
mental models about what sleep sensors have the ability to 
sense  and  distract  users  from  habits  and  behaviors  that  are 
actually  affecting  their  sleep.  Across  different  commercial 
sensors, the metrics used to give sleep quality feedback vary 
and  sometimes  conflict  with  clinical  standards,  potentially 
undermining  people’s  ability  to  improve  their  sleep.  The 
focus on sleep stages, which are difficult to infer from the set 
of  sensors  sleep  technologies  use,  leads  users  to  focus  on 
aspects of their sleep difficult to control, such as REM sleep. 
This  focus  derails  users  from  focusing  on  modifiable 
behaviors and sleep hygiene. 

Our  findings  provide  a  review  of  the  state  of  current  sleep 
sensing technology from the perspective of users and sleep 
experts. We suggest future tools display data in ranges rather 
than  single  point  values.  Tools  should  focus  on  actionable 
feedback  that  integrates  modifiable  behaviors.  Designers 
should  make  the  algorithms  behind  sleep  sensing  devices 
transparent. Sleep self-assessments can help personalize and 
contextualize  sleep  sensing  feedback.  We  hope  this  work 
leads  to  new  designs  which  better  align  sleep  sensing 
technologies with user’s needs and integrate evidence-based 
frameworks  and  strategies  created  by  the  sleep  research 
community. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
We  would  like  to  thank  Katie  Siek  and  our  reviewers  for 
providing feedback to improve this paper. This research was 
reviewed  and  granted  exemption  by  the  University  of 
Washington’s  Institutional  Review  Board.  The  work  was 
supported  by  National  Science  Foundation  #1344613,  the 
University of Washington Research Innovation Award, and the 
Intel Science & Technology Center on Pervasive Computing. 

REFERENCES  
1. 

Kirstine Adam. 1980. Sleep as a Restorative Process 
and  a  Theory  to  Explain  Why.  Progress  in  Brain 
Research 
289–305. 
53: 
http://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6123(08)60070-9 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA68732. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

Jared Bauer, Sunny Consolvo, Benjamin Greenstein, 
et al. 2012. ShutEye. Proceedings of the 2012 ACM 
annual conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems 
’12,  ACM  Press,  1401. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208600 

-  CHI 

Richard B Berry, Rita Brooks, Charlene E Gamaldo, 
et  al.  The  AASM  Manual  for  the  Scoring  of  Sleep 
and Associated Events.  

defining 

customer-centered 

Hugh Beyer and Karen Holtzblatt. 1997. Contextual 
systems. 
design: 
Elsevier.  Retrieved  September  21,  2016  from 
https://books.google.com/books?hl=en&lr=&id=Jx
QaQgOONGIC&oi=fnd&pg=PP2&dq=beyer+and+
holtzblatt+affinity+diagramming&ots=-S-_qGc-
v3&sig=RZ0DfmsXqCjrsTN2qAr634BlWkk 

Daniel J Buysse. 2014. Sleep health: can we define 
it?  Does 
it  matter?  Sleep  37,  1:  9–17. 
http://doi.org/10.5665/sleep.3298 

Daniel J. Buysse, Charles F. Reynolds, Timothy H. 
Monk, Susan R. Berman, and David J. Kupfer. 1989. 
The  Pittsburgh  sleep  quality 
index:  A  new 
instrument  for  psychiatric  practice  and  research. 
Psychiatry 
193–213. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/0165-1781(89)90047-4 

Research 

28, 

2: 

Eun  Kyoung  Choe,  Sunny  Consolvo,  Nathaniel  F. 
Watson, and Julie A. Kientz. 2011. Opportunities for 
computing  technologies  to  support  healthy  sleep 
behaviors.  Proceedings  of 
the  2011  annual 
conference on Human factors in computing systems 
3053. 
Press, 
- 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979395 

ACM 

CHI 

’11, 

Eun  Kyoung  Choe,  Bongshin  Lee,  Matthew  Kay, 
Wanda Pratt, and Julie A. Kientz. 2015. SleepTight: 
for 
Low-burden,  Self-monitoring  Technology 
Capturing  and  Reflecting  on  Sleep  Behaviors. 
Proceedings  of 
International  Joint 
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing 
121–132. 
’15): 
(UbiComp 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804266 

the  ACM 

Eun  Kyoung  Choe,  Bongshin  Lee,  Matthew  Kay, 
Wanda Pratt, and Julie A. Kientz. 2015. SleepTight. 
Proceedings  of  the  2015  ACM  International  Joint 
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing 
-  UbiComp 
121–132. 
Press, 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804266 

’15,  ACM 

Harvey R Colten, Bruce M Altevogt, and Institute of 
Medicine  (US)  Committee  on  Sleep  Medicine  and 
Research.  2006.  Sleep  Disorders  and  Sleep 
Deprivation.  National  Academies  Press 
(US). 
http://doi.org/10.17226/11617 

11. 

Sunny Consolvo, Ryan Libby, Ian Smith, et al. 2008. 
Activity  sensing  in  the  wild.  Proc.  CHI  ’08,  ACM 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

Press, 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357335 

August 

2015: 

1797. 

Felicia Cordeiro, Daniel A. Epstein, Edison Thomaz, 
et  al.  2015.  Barriers  and  Negative  Nudges. 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on 
Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems  -  CHI  ’15, 
ACM 
1159–1162. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702155 

Press, 

Nediyana  Daskalova,  Danaë  Metaxa-Kakavouli, 
Adrienne  Tran,  et  al.  2016.  SleepCoacher. 
Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User 
Interface  Software  and  Technology  -  UIST  ’16, 
ACM 
347–358. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2984511.2984534 

Press, 

Daniel A. Epstein, An Ping, James Fogarty, and Sean 
A.  Munson.  2015.  A  lived  informatics  model  of 
personal informatics. Proceedings of the 2015 ACM 
International  Joint  Conference  on  Pervasive  and 
Ubiquitous Computing - UbiComp ’15, ACM Press, 
731–742. http://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804250 

Jon Froehlich, Shwetak Patel, James A. Landay, et 
al. 2012. The design and evaluation of prototype eco-
feedback displays for fixture-level water usage data. 
Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on 
Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems  -  CHI  ’12, 
2367. 
Press, 
ACM 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208397 

Lisa  Genzel,  Marijn  C.W.  Kroes,  Martin  Dresler, 
and Francesco P. Battaglia. 2014. Light sleep versus 
slow  wave  sleep  in  memory  consolidation:  a 
question of global versus local processes? Trends in 
Neurosciences 
10–19. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2013.10.002 

37, 

1: 

Lauren Hale. 2014. Inadequate Sleep Duration as a 
Public Health and Social Justice Problem: Can We 
Truly  Trade  Off  Our  Daily  Activities  for  More 
Sleep? SLEEP. http://doi.org/10.5665/sleep.4228 

Leah A Irish, Christopher E Kline, Heather E Gunn, 
Daniel J Buysse, and Martica H Hall. 2015. The role 
of  sleep  hygiene  in  promoting  public  health:  A 
review  of  empirical  evidence.  Sleep  medicine 
23–36. 
22: 
reviews 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2014.10.001 

Ravi  Karkar,  Jasmine  Zia,  Roger  Vilardaga,  et  al. 
2015.  A  framework  for  self-experimentation  in 
the  American 
personalized  health.  Journal  of 
Medical Informatics Association. 

20.  Matthew Kay, Eun Kyoung Choe, Jesse Shepherd, et 
al.  2012.  Lullaby.  Proceedings  of  the  2012  ACM 
Conference  on  Ubiquitous  Computing  -  UbiComp 
’12, 226. http://doi.org/10.1145/2370216.2370253 

21.  Matthew  Kay,  Tara  Kola,  Jessica  R  Hullman,  and 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6874Sean A Munson. 2016. When (ish) is My Bus? User-
centered Visualizations of Uncertainty in Everyday, 
Mobile Predictive Systems. Proceedings of the 34th 
Annual  ACM  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in 
Computing 
’16). 
(CHI 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858558 

Systems 

22.  Matthew Kay, Dan Morris, Mc Schraefel, and Julie 
a. Kientz. 2013. There’s No Such Thing as Gaining 
a  Pound:  Reconsidering  the  Bathroom  Scale  User 
the  2013  ACM 
Interface.  Proceedings  of 
international  joint  conference  on  Pervasive  and 
ubiquitous  computing  -  UbiComp  ’13:  401–410. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2493432.2493456 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

Sharon  Keenan  and  Max  Hirshkowitz.  2010. 
Monitoring  and  Staging  Human  Sleep.  Principles 
and Practice of Sleep Medicine: Fifth Edition: 1602–
1609. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/B978-1-4160-6645-
3.00141-9 

Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A stage-
based  model  of  personal  informatics  systems. 
Proceedings of the 28th international conference on 
Human  factors  in  computing  systems  -  CHI  ’10, 
ACM 
557. 
Press, 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753409 

Life  Sciences  &  Transformational  Health.  Global 
Market Study on Sleep Aids: Sleep Apnea to Witness 
Highest  Growth  by  2020.  Retrieved 
from 
http://www.persistencemarketresearch.com/market-
research/sleep-aids-market.asp 

Brian Y. Lim, Anind K. Dey, and Daniel Avrahami. 
2009.  Why  and  why  not  explanations  improve  the 
intelligibility  of  context-aware  intelligent  systems. 
Proceedings of the 27th international conference on 
Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09, ACM 
Press, 
2119. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1519023 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

27.  Wanyu  Liu,  Bernd  Ploderer,  and  Thuong  Hoang. 
2015.  In  Bed  with  Technology.  Proceedings  of  the 
Annual  Meeting  of  the  Australian  Special  Interest 
Group for Computer Human Interaction on - OzCHI 
’15, 
142–151. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2838739.2838742 

Press, 

ACM 

28. 

Jun-ki  Min,  Afsaneh  Doryab,  Jason  Wiese, 

Shahriyar  Amini,  John  Zimmerman,  and  Jason  I 
Hong. 2014. Toss “ N ” Turn  : Smartphone as Sleep 
and Sleep Quality Detector. Proceedings of the 32nd 
annual  ACM  conference  on  Human  factors  in 
computing 
477–486. 
’14: 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557220 

-  CHI 

systems 

Hawley  E.  Montgomery-Downs,  Salvatore  P. 
Insana,  and  Jonathan  A.  Bond.  2012.  Movement 
toward a novel activity monitoring device. Sleep and 
913–917. 
16, 
Breathing 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s11325-011-0585-y 

3: 

Tauhidur  Rahman,  Alexander  T.  Adams,  Ruth 
Vinisha  Ravichandran,  et  al.  2015.  DoppleSleep. 
Proceedings  of  the  2015  ACM  International  Joint 
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing 
-  UbiComp 
39–50. 
Press, 
’15,  ACM 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804280 

Avi  Sadeh  and  Christine  Acebo.  2002.  The  role  of 
actigraphy 
in  sleep  medicine.  Sleep  Medicine 
Reviews 6, 2: 113–124. http://doi.org/10.1053 

Edward J Stepanski and James K Wyatt. 2003. Use 
of sleep hygiene in the treatment of insomnia. Sleep 
medicine 
215–25. 
http://doi.org/10.1053/SMRV.2001.0246 

reviews 

3: 

7, 

Rayoung  Yang  and  Mark  W.  Newman.  2013. 
Learning from a learning thermostat. Proceedings of 
the  2013  ACM  international  joint  conference  on 
Pervasive and ubiquitous computing - UbiComp ’13, 
ACM 
93. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2493432.2493489 

Press, 

Rayoung Yang, Eunice Shin, Mark W. Newman, and 
Mark  S.  Ackerman.  2015.  When  fitness  trackers 
don’t  “fit.”  Proceedings  of 
the  2015  ACM 
International  Joint  Conference  on  Pervasive  and 
Ubiquitous Computing - UbiComp ’15, ACM Press, 
623–634. http://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804269 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6875 
 
 
 
 
 
 
