 Monitoring Children’s Physical Activity and Sleep:  
A Study of Surveillance and Information Disclosure 
Mikkel S. Jørgensen, Frederik K. Nissen, Jeni Paay, Jesper Kjeldskov, Mikael B. Skov 
Department of Computer Science / Research Centre for Socio+Interactive Design 
Aalborg University, Aalborg East, Denmark 
{mikkel.skare, frederikkastrup}@gmail.com,{jeni, jesper, dubois}@cs.aau.dk  

ABSTRACT 
Children  and  parents  build  mutual  trust  through  voluntary 
disclosure, but at the same time parents are guardians who 
monitor  and  guide  children  as  they  grow  up.  Emerging 
technologies offer new opportunities for parents to monitor 
children while being separated. We investigated how sleep 
and physical activity data from a Fitbit Flex wristband worn 
by children (aged 9-12 years) were shared in families over 
a five-week period. We discovered that the children would 
optimize  their  data  as  they  learned  more  about  their  own 
activities, and then started pleasing their parents as a result 
of being under surveillance. Interestingly, we also saw that 
parents used the physical activity and sleep data to question 
children  about  specific  activities,  and  while  this  increased 
parental  control,  it  reduced  spontaneous  and  voluntary 
information  disclosure  from  the  children  about  their  daily 
activities.  This  appeared  to  negatively  influence  the  trust 
between the children and their parents. 

Author Keywords 
Surveillance,  children,  parents,  disclosure,  trust,  activity, 
tracking, sleep 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m.  Information interfaces and  presentation  (e.g.,  HCI): 
Miscellaneous.  

INTRODUCTION 
As  we  leave  more  and  more digital  footprints  while  using 
mobile  technology,  we  increasingly  face  issues  related  to 
surveillance. In 2014, a survey showed that 40% of Danish 
parents of children aged 0-15 years old found it acceptable 
to  monitor  their  child’s  location  through  GPS  technology, 
and 30% of these parents would actually consider installing 
a  location-tracking  app  on  the  mobile  phones  of  their 
children. While this  causes  controversy,  it  also  shows that 
as mobile technology evolves and gives us new possibilities 
for  monitoring  other  people,  we  are  faced  with  new 
challenges  of  surveillance,  disclosure,  and  trust.  There  are 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
OzCHI  '16,  November  29-December  02,  2016,  Launceston,  T  AS,
Australia 
© 2016 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4618-4/16/11...$15.00 
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3010915.3010936 

1

Figure 1: One of the participants wearing the Fitbit Flex™ 
wristband during the study.  
numerous  information  and  communication  technologies 
that  enable  parents  to  monitor  children  without  the 
children’s  knowledge.  Using  such  existing  technologies, 
parents  (and  others)  can  get  information  and  data  about 
children on for example their whereabouts, their activities, 
or  their  actions.  As  an  example  of  a  commercial  product, 
the  PC  Tattletale  (PC  Tattletale,  2016)  provides  parents 
with the ability to record, monitor, or limit children’s online 
activities,  stating  on  its  website  “…  your  son  or  daughter 
will  have  no  idea  that  you  are  watching  their  every  move 
…”.  Other  tools  provide  parents  with  data  about  their 
children’s  location,  allowing  them  to  track  children’s 
physical movements (Vasalou et al., 2012).  

The use of monitoring technologies raises obvious concerns 
in relation to trust. Family trust between children and their 
parents is a vital part of family wellbeing, and parental trust 
in  adolescents  is  often  based  on  knowledge  of  the  child’s 
daily  activities  (Dalsgaard  et  al.,  2007;  Kerr  et  al.,  1999). 
With  the  use  of  monitoring  or  surveillance  technologies, 
parental knowledge can possibly be supplemented with, or 
built on, monitored data.  

While trust has long been a voiced concern within the field 
of HCI (e.g. Graham et al., 2004; Torremante et al., 2015), 
few  research  studies  investigate  the  impact  of  monitoring 
technologies  in  real  life.  Until  now,  research  studies  have 
considered digital parenting in relation to location tracking 
(Boesen et al. 2010; Consolvo et al., 2005; Rode, 2009) or 
to children’s digital lives (March and Fleuriot, 2006; Yardi 
and  Bruckman,  2011)  and  more  recently  how  house  locks 
and security cameras affect teens’ privacy (Ur et al., 2014), 
but we have seen limited research focusing on surveillance 
or  monitoring  of  children’s  more  daily  activities  using 
technology and how this affects mutual trust.  

In  response  to  this,  we  studied  sleep  and  physical  activity 
data  from  an  activity-tracking  wristband  worn  by  children 

 
 
 
  
 
 
(aged  9-12  years)  and  shared  this  data  in  families  over  a 
five-week  period  with  the  children’s  knowledge  of  what 
was  being  shared.  We  were  particularly  interested  in 
studying how monitoring affected the relationship between 
children  and  parents,  how  parents  would  act  upon  such 
data,  and  how  children  would  behave  knowing  that  their 
parents were monitoring them. 

Our  contributions  are  two-fold.  First,  we  provide  detailed 
qualitative  insights  on  how  parents  engaged  with  the 
collected Fitbit data and how they interpreted the children’s 
activity and sleep data and question their children, but also 
how  the  children  would  optimize  behaviour  and  actively 
use  data  in  their  own  favour.  Secondly,  we  illustrate  how 
trust is affected and discuss how the collected activity and 
sleep data decreased parent uncertainty. At the same time, it 
reduced spontaneous and voluntary information disclosure, 
which seemed to negatively influence the trust between the 
children and their parents. 

RELATED WORK 
In this section, we outline and discuss research on human-
computer interaction and surveillance and trust particularly 
in relation to children and parents.  

Trust and Distrust between Children and Parents 
Trust between parents and their children is crucial and has 
been  investigated  in  several  studies.  As  an  example, 
Vasalou  et  al.  (2012)  argue  that  when  moving  towards 
adulthood,  children  must  develop  independence  both  in 
thought  and  in  action,  and  normally  under  parental 
direction and control. They explain that this is not a trivial 
task  for  parents,  as they  must  balance  the  control  required 
in  protecting  their  children  with  the  openness  that  allows 
the  children  to  explore  their  environment  in  order  to 
develop self-direction. Kerr et al. (1999) found that parents 
who  gain  knowledge  about  their  children’s  daily  activities 
trust  their  children  more,  but  this  is  only  the  case  if  the 
knowledge  is  obtained  through  spontaneous  and  voluntary 
disclosure from the  children. When behaviour is  regulated 
through extrinsic forces (e.g. fear of punishment), children 
are  less  likely  to  internalize  the  values  of  reliability  and 
honesty  (Kerr  et  al.,  1999).  Further,  Mayer  (2003)  found 
that uncertainty might also be essential in order to display 
trustworthiness  in  the  first  place,  as  trustworthiness  can 
only be displayed when the possibility of untrustworthiness 
exists.  Thus,  parents  who  utilize  surveillance  technologies 
as  part  of  parenting  may  actually  not  end  up trusting  their 
children  more;  on  the  contrary  the  use  and  application  of 
surveillance  technology  might  even  make  them  trust  their 
children less. 

Technologies and Surveillance in Families 
Emerging technologies increasingly enable monitoring and 
surveillance as they become mobile and portable, integrate 
new  features  and  functionality,  e.g.  GPS,  accelerometers, 
while at the same time being connected and online. Several 
research  studies  have  investigated  the  role  of  technology 
for  surveillance  in  families  and  often  studies  demonstrate 
that surveillance technology is motivated by uncertainty or 

2

concern  about  children’s  safety  (e.g.  Czeskis  et  al.,  2010; 
March  and  Fleuriot,  2006;  Rode,  2009;  Yardi  and 
Bruckman, 2011, Ur et al., 2014). 

Internet  use  by 

Yardi and Bruckman (2011) discovered that parents find it 
difficult  to  understand  or  interpret  how  and  why  children 
use  technology,  and  thus  how  they  should  as  parents  set 
rules and boundaries for effective parenting. Some parents 
requiring  password 
would  monitor 
information  or  requiring  that  they  be  Facebook  friends. 
Some  would  even  forward  children’s  emails  to  their  own 
email  addresses  without  their  children’s  knowledge.  Rode 
(2009)  found  in  a study  involving  12  families that  several 
parents  found  their  child’s  Internet  activities  threatening 
and therefore defined and declared off-limit activities. Rode 
argues  that  the  perceived  gap  between  the  expertise  of 
parents  and  children  undermines  parental  authority.  Also, 
March  and  Fleuriot  (2006)  studied  teenage  girls’  online 
communication  and  found  that  girls  preferred  non-public 
PCs  when  communicating  privately  either  via 
text 
messages  or  using  instant  messaging  and  the  girls  found 
their mobile phones to be private technologies. 

But the use of technologies for monitoring and surveillance 
is not uncomplicated. Gammon et al. (2005) discovered that 
parents  were  likely  to  ask  their  children  about  diabetes 
management  if  they  had  access  to  extra  information  and 
that  surveillance  technology  used  to  track  diabetes  related 
aspects of a child’s activities could represent an additional 
source  of  tension  and  in  turn  a  negative  parent-child 
relationship.  Toscos  et  al.  (2012)  argue  that  parents  using 
these  new  tracking  developments  in  health  monitoring 
technologies,  risk  crossing  personal  boundaries  that  might 
cause  conflicts  in  the  parent-child  relationship.  However, 
they  argue  that there  is  still much  to understand  about  the 
impact  of  using  remote  health  monitoring  technologies 
given the potential adverse effects on the family dynamics. 
Mancini  et  al.  (2011)  stress  that  social  contracts  within 
close relationships and tracking technology possibilities can 
create  anxieties  and  inner  conflicts  that  may  compromise 
relationships.  However,  other  studies  have  shown  that 
monitoring technologies hold promising benefits as family 
members  experience  positive  gains  from  aspects  of 
reassurance,  connectedness,  identity  and  social  touch  [3]. 
Thus,  equal  monitoring  can  promote  family  identity  and 
connectedness.  

Bentley et al. (2007) discovered that participants would use 
certain  information  to  infer  location  and  activity  of  other 
people.  As  with  the  study  by  Mancini  et  al.  (2011),  this 
study  allowed  plausible  deniability,  as  it  could  not  supply 
users  with  absolute  location  information  and  therefore  did 
not  risk  making  people  feel  uneasy  about  the  privacy 
implications.  As  such,  few  privacy  concerns  were  raised 
during the study. In fact, as the participants were in close-
tie  relationships, 
to  share  even  more 
information with each other.   

they  wanted 

 
Participant 
(Girl/Boy) 

Age 

Sports 
Activities 

Parents in 
household (age) 

Parents Occupation 

Fitbit 
(duration) 

Sync. 
Device 

G1 

11 

G2 

G3 

G4 

B1 

B2 

B3 

9 

10 

11 

12 

12 

10 

Soccer (2x/week) 
Gymnastics (2x/week) 
Swimming (1x/week) 

Swimming (2x/month) 

Mother (42) 
Father (45) 

Psychiatric nurse  
and engineer 

Mother (39) 
Father (35) 

Nurse and  
renovation worker 

Soccer (2x/week) 
Swimming (1x/week) 

Mother (48) 
Father (49) 

High school teacher and 
academic worker 

Soccer (2x/week) 
Girl scouts (1x/week) 

Badminton (4x/week) 
Ice skating (1x/week) 

Mother (39) 
Father (42) 

Mother (44) 
Father (47) 

Nurse and  
chief of economy 

Senior researcher and 
marketing chief  

30 days 

28 days* 

29 days 

33 days 

35 days 

None 

Mother (42) 

Flexible job 

19 days** 

Karate (2x/week) 
Skateboard (every day) 

Mother (41) 

Administrative officer 

36 days 

Own 
(iPad Mini) 

Mother’s 
(iPhone 5) 

Own 
(iPad mini) 

Own 
(iPad 4) 

Own  
(iPhone 5) 

Own 
(iPhone 5 ) 

Mother’s 
(iPhone 4S) 

Table 1: Demographics of participating children and parents. Remarks to the table: *Broke her arm after 4 days into the study 
but participated in the entire period **Lost the Fitbit wristband after 19 days of use. 

STUDY 
The purpose of the study was to investigate monitoring and 
information  disclosure  between  children  and  their  parents 
and  more  specifically  to  study  sleep  and  physical  activity. 
Inspired by a study on interpersonal trust between children 
and  parents  (Rotenburg,  1995),  we  chose  preteen  children 
(9-12  years)  as  in  this  age  group  they  become  more  and 
more independent and spend an increasing amount of time 
away  from  the  home  and  their  parents.  Therefore  parental 
trust  usually  grows  in  importance  (Kerr  et  al.,  1999).  We 
chose  an  off-the-shelf  wearable  mobile  activity  tracker 
called  Fitbit  Flex™  (hereafter  referred to  as  Fitbit),  which 
has  been  studied  for  example  self-trackers  (Choe  et  al., 
2014;  Fritz  et  al.,  2014).  Fitbit  tracks  and  records  steps 
taken, active minutes, and sleep. In many situations, parents 
will monitor or guide physical activity (like active minutes) 
or sleep as an integrated part of parental rules for children 
in this age group. Therefore, we chose to include these two 
aspects of children’s daily lives.  

As our study involves surveillance and monitoring, we had 
some  methodological considerations on ethics and consent 
before  we started the  study.  For  example  it  was  important 
to  us  that  the  participating  children  understood  what  they 
were  to  participate  in.  We  recruited  the  children  and  their 
families through postings on local public noticeboards and 
extended  personal  networks,  and  none  of  the  recruited 
families  were  acquainted  with 
the  researchers  who 
conducted  the  study  and  interviews.  First,  the  children 
received a participant information statement about the study 
before  agreeing to  participate (which  we also explained to 
them  orally).  The  statement  included  information  about 
their  role in the study,  e.g.  they  should  wear the  Fitbit for 
approximately  one  month,  the  Fitbit  tracked  steps,  active 
minutes,  and  sleep,  and  the  logged  data  would  be  shared 

with their parents (and the researchers). Further, it outlined 
the  interview  plan,  information  about  confidentiality,  and 
that  they  could  quit  the  study  at  any  time.  Secondly,  the 
children  signed  a  participant  consent  form  (or  an  assent 
form  as  they  are  minors)  together  with  the  principal 
researcher.  Afterwards,  parents  signed  the  form  as  legal 
guardians, but also as study participants. 

Participants 
Seven children (four girls) from seven families with twelve 
parents  participated  in  our  study.  The  children  were 
between  9  and  12  years  old  (M=10.7)  and  they  lived  in 
close  proximity  to  the  city  of  Aalborg,  Denmark.  They 
were enrolled in primary schools from 3rd to 6th grade and 
six  of  them  regularly  participated  in  sports  activities  after 
school  (e.g.  swimming,  gymnastics).  In  two  families,  the 
parents were divorced and the children lived primarily with 
their mother. Six children had siblings (see table 1). 

All children lived close to the school they attended (within 
500m to 2km) and most of them either walked or biked to 
school.  The  parents  worked  in  various  employments,  e.g. 
nurse,  labourer,  engineer.  Five  children  used  their  own 
smartphone or tablet for synchronization with Fitbit, while 
two used their mother’s smartphone. See table 1 for further 
details.  None  of  the  families  had  used  Fitbit  or  similar 
technology prior to the study. The families received a 150kr 
cinema voucher (~US$25) upon completion of the study.  

Procedure and Data Collection 
During  four  to  five  weeks,  the  seven  children  were 
encouraged  to  wear  the  Fitbit  wristband  as  much  as 
possible. Thus, they should try to wear it day and night and 
only  take  it  off  when  recharging  the  battery.  The  parents 
had  access  to  the  data  of  their  own  child  through  a  Fitbit 
account  and  they  could  login  using  mobile  phones  or  PCs 
to access the data at any time. During these weeks, we held 

3

 
three  meetings  or  interviews  with  the  families  where  six 
families chose to be interviewed at home while one family 
chose  to  be  interviewed  at  the  mother’s  workplace.  We 
refer  to  these  interviews  as:  Deployment,  follow-up  and 
steering, and collecting experiences. 

(i) Deployment: The primary purpose of the first interview 
was  to  introduce  the  families  to  the  study  and  the  Fitbit 
wristband. As part of the deployment, we helped install the 
Fitbit  application  on  their  smartphones  and  tablets.  The 
child and the parents received information  about the study 
and were asked to read and sign a consent form.  

We conducted a semi-structured interview to gain an initial 
understanding  of the  daily lives, activities, and routines of 
the  participating  families. First we interviewed  the parents 
about the child’s activities throughout the day and routines 
surrounding  bedtimes.  Subsequently,  we  interviewed  the 
child to get his or her perspective on the same issues. Here 
we wanted to obtain an early impression of differences and 
similarities  in  perceptions  of  activity  and  sleep.  The 
interviews took between 20 and 35 minutes and were audio 
recorded. We encouraged the parents to discuss experiences 
with the Fitbit during the study with their child. In order to 
help  the  families  remember  and  capture  their  experiences 
using  the  Fitbit,  we  provided  them  with  a  personal  diary, 
which we encouraged both parents and child to use.  

(ii)  Follow-Up  and  Steering:  The  purpose  of  this  meeting 
was to ensure that the families were using the Fitbit and to 
solve any experienced technical problems. This part of the 
study ran during the four weeks of the study, and was at a 
slightly  different  time  for  each  family.  It  consisted  of  two 
parts namely an interview and follow-up phone interviews. 
The  primary  interview  was  held  approximately  one  week 
into the study.  

During the five weeks, we contacted the families by phone 
if no activities were logged for the child over a whole day. 
In  order  to  discover  this,  we  would  log  in  to  the  Fitbit 
website  each  day  and  check  logged  activities  and  events. 
Thus, in the end, we contacted the families twelve times (at 
least one time for each family) during the study where the 
primary  reason  for  no  activities  or  events  being  registered 
with  the  system  was  that  the  children  had  forgotten  to 
activate  or  deactivate  sleep  mode.  The  second  reason  was 
that they forgot to charge either the Fitbit or the device for 
synchronization  (e.g.  smartphone  or  tablet).  Additionally, 
the families contacted us eight times during this part of the 
study with questions on, for example, technical issues (e.g. 
was  it  safe  to  wear  the  wristband  while  swimming)  and 
practical  issues  (e.g.  one  child  broke  her  arm  during  the 
study  and  they  wanted  to  change  which  arm  she  wore  the 
wristband  on).  Finally,  we  texted  facts  from  logged  Fitbit 
usage data to the parents in order to encourage them to stay 
engaged  in the  study.  These  facts  were  playful  in the  way 
they were presented, based on the data logged and tailored 
to the individual family. 

(iii) Collecting Experiences: The purpose of this interview 
was  to  understand  the  experiences  the  families  had  with 

Participant 

Steps  

Active minutes 

Sleep  

Average per day (SD) 

G1 

G2* 

G3 

G4 

B5 

B6** 

B7 

9.229 steps 
(7063) 

5 hrs. 22 min 
(141) 

9 hrs.  
(58 min) 

7.909 steps 
(4195) 

5 hrs. 1 min 
(117) 

8 hrs. 24 min  
(102 min) 

12.213 steps 
(6502) 

6 hrs. 6 min 
(139) 

8 hrs. 42 min 
(60 min) 

6.643 steps 
(4272) 

4 hrs. 2 min 
(82) 

9 hrs. 6 min  
(30 min) 

12.582 steps 
(9166) 

5 hrs. 16 min 
(148) 

8 hrs. 30 min 
(54 min) 

10.224 steps 
(7064) 

4 hrs. 30 min 
(89) 

8 hrs. 24 min 
(36 min) 

8.156 steps 
(5520) 

3 hrs. 50 min 
(111) 

9 hrs. 54 min 
(177 min) 

Table 2: Logged data about steps, active minutes, and sleep for 
the participating children 

Fitbit.  We  collected  the  previously  supplied  diaries  at  the 
beginning of each interview. These diaries helped shape the 
interview  as  several  parents  had  noted  challenges  when 
using  the  Fitbit.  We  conducted  semi-structured  interviews 
around  five  overall  themes:  functionality  of  Fitbit,  usage 
patterns, interpretation of the data, impact of having access 
to the data, and sharing the  data.  The children and parents 
were  both  home  when  we interviewed  them,  but  often  the 
parents would attend to other things around the house while 
we interviewed the child, but they could oversee the session 
as guardians. All interviews were audio-recorded. 

Subsequently, interviews were fully transcribed (188 pages 
total)  and  we  immersed  ourselves  in  the  data  through 
reading  the  transcriptions  several  times.  We  conducted  a 
cooperative  inductive  thematic  analysis  to  infer  patterns 
and  recurring  themes  in  the  data,  which  were  later 
candidates 
further  qualitative  analysis.  Through 
repeated assessment, several topics and themes emerged.  

for 

in 

FINDINGS 
In this section, we present the findings from the study. All 
the  names 
the  participating  families  have  been 
anonymized, girls given a G prefix, and boys a B. Six of the 
participating children wore the wristband between 19 to 36 
days  (M=30), while  one of the  participating  children wore 
the  wristband  for  19  days  (he  lost  the  wristband  during 
school hours). During  the study, the  children would check 
the  Fitbit  data  several  times  each  day.  One  even  reported 
that  he  would  check  it  up  to  five  times  a  day.  All  parents 
and children reported that they would look at the data both 
alone and together with others.  

In  the  following  we  describe  the  steps  taken,  active 
minutes, and hours slept by the participants while wearing 
the  Fitbit.  The  data  can  also be  seen in  table 2. We  found 
that  the  average  amount  of  steps  taken  per  day  varied 
greatly  between  the  children  ranging  from  6643  steps  to 

4

 
 
12582  steps.  Active  minutes  per  day  also  varied  between 
the  children  ranging  from  3  hours  and  50  minutes  to  6 
hours and 6 minutes. The highest number of steps taken and 
active  minutes  for  one  day  was  39685  steps  and  12  hours 
respectively, which were logged during a day of badminton 
tournaments by B5. The lowest number of steps taken and 
active  minutes  were  logged  by  B6  and  occurred  on  the 
same day, and he reported that he had spent an entire day in 
bed due to illness.  We also identified days where no steps 
or active minutes had been  registered, which was reported 
by the four families that it occurred with as being a result of 
the Fitbit wristband running out of power.  

We  found  that  the  average  amount  of  hours  slept  per  day 
varied between the children ranging from between 8 hours 
and  24  minutes  to  9  hours  and  54  minutes.  The  highest 
number of hours slept was 13 hours and 45 minutes by B7 
and  the  lowest  number  of  hours  slept  was  2  hours  and  30 
minutes  (G3).  There  where  days  where  no  sleep  had  been 
registered,  which  we  have  taken  to  be  an  equipment  issue 
(e.g., forgetting to activate sleep mode) and these have been 
omitted in the calculations below.   

Getting Familiar with and Using the Wristband 
All  seven  children  found the Fitbit  wristband  enjoyable  to 
use and described the experience with words like “fun”  or 
“cool”. In particular, they liked to reach goals (e.g., 10,000 
steps),  as it  made  the  LEDs  on the  wristband light up  and 
made it  vibrate.  G3  explained  how  she  felt  when  reaching 
the 10,000 steps for the day:  

It  was  like:  ‘Now  I’ve  reached  the  goal  for  today!’  That 
was cool! G3 

While  all  children  found  the  wristband  enjoyable  to  use, 
some of them (2/7) expressed that the novelty faded after a 
few  weeks  mainly  due  to  the  fact  that  they  could  easily 
reach  the  goals  in  Fitbit  (10,000  steps).  But  five  children 
found the wristband and application interesting throughout 
the  entire  study.  Here  some  of  them  argued  that  they  had 
more data for comparison towards the end of the study: 

I did not know much about it [how many steps he took] in 
the  beginning,  but  at  the  end  it  becomes  more  exciting 
because I had learned something about it B7 

The children described how they were trying to understand 
how  Fitbit  translated  different  types  of  activities  (e.g., 
jumping on a trampoline) into steps and active minutes. For 
instance,  they  experimented  with  the  Fitbit  to  see  how 
many  steps  running  around  the  table  produced,  and  how 
many  active  minutes  could  be  achieved  at  different  sports 
activities.  The  children  also  investigated  how  fast  their 
actions would be synchronized to their smartphone or tablet 
and  how  shaking  their  arms  would  be  interpreted  as  steps 
by the wristband.  

The  children  and  their  parents  experienced  a  number  of 
problems in the beginning of the study primarily related to 
charging the battery and activating sleep mode. As we had 
instructed  the  children  to  wear  the  wristband  as  much  as 
possible, it became difficult to find a suitable time slot for 

charging the battery. While two parents mentioned that they 
would  charge  it  during  idle  times  (e.g.,  watching  TV), 
many of the parents (5/7) said that they would charge it late 
in  the  evenings  and  then  slip  it  onto  their  sleeping  child’s 
wrist when it was fully charged. Another challenge was the 
sleep  mode  where  we  found  that  only  one  family  had 
managed  to  activate  and  deactivate  sleep  mode  each  day 
throughout  the  entire  study  period.  This  is  perhaps  not 
surprising, as this requires new routines and behaviors.  

Data Surveillance versus Activity Surveillance 
We observed that parents would monitor their children and 
they often attempted to use the Fitbit data to infer or learn 
about the children’s activities or even mood. As part of the 
study, we enabled monitoring for the parents, as they could 
look  up  three  different  data  sources  of  their  children’s 
activities, namely steps taken, active minutes, and sleep. As 
such,  it  is  not  surprising  that  we  observed  this  kind  of 
monitoring  or  even  surveillance.  Surveillance  is  typically 
the  monitoring  of  behavior,  activities,  or  other  changing 
information of other people for the purpose of influencing, 
managing, directing, or protecting them (Lyon, 2007).  

Most parents (6/7) explained that they had been curious as 
to how active their children were while at school, and that 
the  Fitbit  data provided them  with these  kinds  of insights. 
One of them even mentioned that these insights allowed her 
to manage and potentially direct her child, which resonates 
with  Lyon’s  definition  of  surveillance  (Lyon,  2007).  We 
found  that  most  parents  used  the  Fitbit  data  to  infer  or 
interpret  the  wellbeing  of  their  children  (e.g.  mood, 
distress, and tiredness). For example, one mother explained 
how she used the data to infer her son’s mood: 

Well, if  he logged  in  at school  then  I  knew.  If it  had been 
good, then he is happy when he gets home. And then I knew 
that  he  came  home  and  was.  When  it  had  vibrated  or 
something like that B6 (mother) 

Parents would also attempt to infer or understand distress in 
their children from the data. For instance, the parents of G1 
explained  during  the  interviews  how  they  observed  that 
their daughter had been restless for 45 minutes during one 
night,  which  made  them  anxious  and  wonder  what  had 
happened. But the daughter had just been to the bath, and if 
she had not told them, they would have kept speculating: 

If  she  had  not  said  anything,  then  we  might  have  kept 
wondering what happened … did she have a nightmare or 
was it something else that caused her to wake up during the 
night G1 (mother)  

Incomplete  and  abstract  data  made  the  parents  worry,  as 
they  were  not  able  to  infer  the  reason  behind  it.  This 
showed that the low-level Fitbit data is sometimes difficult 
to understand and act upon. This also became evident as the 
parents  were  much  more  interested  in  talking  about  the 
activities  behind  the  data  instead  of  the  actual  data  itself 
(e.g.,  talking  about  an  active  football  practice  instead  of 
5,000 steps). For instance, the mother of B5 described how 
she  valued  the  steps  her  son  took  at  badminton  practice 

5

 
higher  than  the  steps  he  took  at  home,  as  she  knew  they 
were two very different things activity wise.  

Parents  assigned  meta-information  (e.g.,  context  and  prior 
knowledge  about  the  child)  to  the  Fitbit  data  in  order  to 
infer what the children were doing or how they were doing. 
Two of the parents explained that having access to the data 
gave  them  a  greater  understanding  of  why  their  children 
behaved  the  way  they  did  (e.g.,  why  a  child  was  tired 
during the day or in a bad mood), as they were able to map 
wellbeing  to  specific  levels  of  activity  and  amounts  of 
sleep. As such, these parents mentioned that the data could 
prepare  them  to  deal  with  future  scenarios  involving 
(amongst other things) the tiredness of their children, as the 
parents  would  be  able  to  predict  these  situations  by 
monitoring their children’s data beforehand. 

Being under Surveillance: Action and Response 
While all children mentioned that they would start to forget 
wearing the wristband after a couple of days, we identified 
a number of situations where the children were reminded of 
the wristband. Sometimes other children would comment or 
identify  the  wristband  and  also  the  wristband  itself  would 
vibrate  when  reaching  certain  goals  (10,000  steps),  which 
would  make  the  children  aware  of  wearing  the  wristband. 
The  more  they  became  aware  of  wearing  the  Fitbit,  the 
more they started to think about being monitored.  

We found that the children responded in two different ways 
to their parents being able to monitor their data and activity. 
Some  children  stated  that  they  did  not  like  it  (3/7),  while 
others indicated that they felt indifferent (4/7). Three of the 
children explicitly mentioned that they were uncomfortable 
about the fact that their parents were monitoring them and 
were able to see how active they had been during the day or 
how they slept at night. For instance, B7 explained that his 
mother  was  sometimes  monitoring  his  data  on  steps  and 
active  minutes in  order to  see  “how  much  he  was  doing”, 
and he characterized it as “scary”. He later compared it to 
“stalker-like” behavior: 

It is like when you stalk someone, and then you know what 
he or she is doing. It is like she [his mother] stalks me when 
she monitors what I am actually doing. B7 

Another  example  was  B6  who  described  that  his  mother 
had started to come into his bedroom just before bedtime to 
ask  him  about  the  Fitbit  data,  and  he  said  that  she  would 
either cheer or scold him “then she makes a cheering sound 
or she makes a yelling sound.” 

We  were  surprised  to  observe  that  four  children  did  not 
mind that their parents had access to the logged data. These 
children  did  not  themselves  mention  anything  related  to 
being under surveillance. For example, when asked how he 
felt about his parents having data access, B5 explained: 

Well, I thought it was ok that they could also manage it [a 
Fitbit]  and  the  sorts.  Also,  if  I  did  not  have  access  to  my 
phone then I could use theirs to check the data. I found that 
to be cool. B5  

From our interviews it became clear, that these children did 
not mind being monitored or under surveillance as they did 
not  experience  any  consequences  of  the  monitoring.  The 
parents of two children rarely asked their children about the 
Fitbit  wristband  and  the  data  collected.  One  of  them  (G2) 
mentioned,  “Dad  does  not  actually  know  what  to  do  with 
the wristband”. Thus, these children never experienced any 
consequences of wearing the wristband in terms of parents 
questioning them or placing restrictions: 

Well, I did not require it of him.  It  was not like  he had to 
find something to do or something. Well, it was just to see 
what he did. It was not to twist his arm around his back and 
tell  him  to  walk  10,000  steps  tomorrow.  I  did  not demand 
this of him B6 (mother) 

Finally,  some  children used the  data to support their  story 
or convince their parents about behavior. For instance,  B7 
explained that he used the data to “prove” to his mother that 
he  was  actually  awake  at  night,  something  his  mother  did 
not believe.  

She believes much more in me after this. I might as well say 
she  believes  me a  100%  more  than  she  did  before.  Before 
she did not even think about that I told her the truth about 
me waking up at night at 5am. B7 

We  found  that  the  children  had  two  different  reactions  to 
their  parents  potentially  monitoring  their  data.  First,  this 
knowledge  could  trigger  the  children  to  start  being  more 
active  and  thus  get  more  exercise  (e.g.,  walking  longer 
routes  to  school)  in  order  to  raise  their  number  of  steps 
taken  or  number  of  active  minutes.  For  instance,  B6 
explained how his mother would either cheer or scold him 
depending  on  his  level  of  activity  shown  by  the  Fitbit 
application.  This  made  him  go  for  long  walks  with  the 
family dog in order to increase the number of  steps taken. 
His  mother  told  us that  she  did  not  consider  this  behavior 
normal. She explained that he would usually only walk the 
dog when specifically told to do so:   

No,  he  would  only  have  done  it  [walked  the  dog]  in  the 
past, if he had been told to do so B6 (mother) 

The  second  reaction  was  that  the  children  would  start  to 
optimize their behavior (e.g., utilizing shortcuts for raising 
number of steps taken). For instance, G2 explained that she 
found  that  taking  “small  steps”  and  “running  on  the  spot” 
generated  a  high  number  of  steps,  which  she  could  then 
present to her mother.  

Trust and Distrust 
Parental trust in adolescents is usually based on knowledge 
and more specifically on knowledge of the child's past and 
present behaviors (Kerr et al., 1999). Our study showed that 
parents  used  the  Fitbit  data  to  learn  about  their  children’s 
sleep  and  physical  activities,  and  they  would  also  use  the 
data to  facilitate  parental  control  (i.e.,  impose  and  support 
rules  and  restrictions). Kerr  et  al.  (1999)  describe  parental 
control  as  imposing  rules  and  restrictions  that  would 
require  children  to  give  their  parents  information  about 
their whereabouts and associations before making plans.  

6

 
We  observed  that  Fitbit  supplied  parents  with  data  that 
could  potentially  be  used  to  impose  rules  and  restrictions 
(e.g., bedtimes and not sitting in front of the computer the 
whole  day)  that  would  usually  require  their  children  to 
disclose  this  information.  Parents  of  six  of  the  children 
described how they would monitor and compare data from 
the beginning of the study to data from the end of the study, 
which  increased  their  awareness  of  the  child’s  day-to-day 
activities (e.g., how active they were during lunch breaks).  

These parents  would  confront  their  children  with the data, 
if  they  somehow  felt  the  child  was  not  disclosing  such 
information. For instance, the mother of  B6 had asked her 
son to walk the dog, but then she noticed that he had been 
particularly inactive one day (i.e., only walked a couple of 
steps). This made her think that he could not possibly have 
walked  the  dog.  Later,  she  explained  how  she  felt  more 
confident in her son actually walking the dog when she told 
him  to.  This  resonates  well  with  Kerr  et  al.  (1999)  that  a 
high  degree  of  control  might  make  parents  more  trusting 
because  they  feel  that  the  child's  behavior  is  highly 
predictable as it is under their control.  

Parents  of two of the  children  argued that  Fitbit  presented 
them  with  an  opportunity  to  change  their  children’s 
routines  (e.g.,  bedtimes).  However,  sometimes  the  data 
allowed  parents  to  see  that  their  children  were  actually 
telling  the truth.  For  instance,  the  mother  of  G1  asked  her 
daughter  how  much  she  had  slept  during  a  gymnastics 
camp.  The  mother  then  proceeded  to  look  at  the  logged 
sleep data in order to verify that this was really the case, as 
no strict bed times were enforced at the gymnastics camp: 

Then  she  had  this  weekend  with  gymnastics  camp  and 
sleepover. We picked her up Sunday morning and checked 
when  we  got  home.  She  told  us  that  she  had  had  seven 
hours of sleep. Then we talked about the fact that we could 
check  whether  it  was  consistent  with  what  she  had  been 
telling  us.  Because  we  have  not  been  able  to  have  any 
control while she was out there. G1 (mother) 

Parental  trust  is  also  strongly  linked  to  spontaneous  child 
disclosure  (Lyon,  2007).  B5’s  mother  described  how  they 
used Fitbit as a common project. B5 was an elite badminton 
player,  which  requires  a  certain  amount  of  training.  She 
mentioned how her  son told her about his training and the 
corresponding data from Fitbit. 

We  talked  a  lot  about  it.  It  was  a  little  project  we  had 
together. I thought it went very well and B5 is very good at 
telling me and good at doing all these things. B5 (mother) 

DISCUSSION 
Our findings show that parents and children became aware 
of and used  the possibilities of monitoring daily activities. 
Not surprisingly, the  data sometimes reassured the parents 
on the children’s physical activity and sleep, e.g. what they 
were doing or had been doing. This confirms findings from 
previous studies  e.g.  Mancini  et al. (2011)  who found that 
location tracking of children reassured parents. Also, often 
the  children  felt  under  surveillance  and  several  of  them 

were  very  uncomfortable  about  this  –  again  this  is  not 
surprising  and  has  been  shown  in  previous  studies,  for 
example  (Boesen  et  al.,  2010;  Vasalou  et  al.,  2012,  Ur  et 
al., 2014). 

Most  previous  family  monitoring  research  has  considered 
location  tracking  (Boesen  et  al.  2010;  Consolvo  et  al., 
2005;  Rode,  2009,  digital  lives  of  children  (March  and 
Fleuriot,  2006;  Yardi  and  Bruckman,  2011),  or  home-
entryway  surveillance  and  privacy  (Ur  et  al.,  2014).  We 
studied  daily  non-digital  activities  of  children  and  found 
two  observations  that  were  surprising  and  that  illustrate 
parts  of  our  contribution.  Firstly,  it  was  interesting  to 
observe  how  deeply  engaged  some  parents  would  be  with 
the data on sleep and physical activity, and how the parents 
would  in  fact  use  the  data  to  question  their  children  and 
sometimes request additional information and even impose 
new  parental  rules.  Secondly,  while  some  children  were 
uncomfortable with the fact that they were being monitored 
closely  by  their  parents,  it  was  surprising  and  somehow 
interesting  to  observe  that  some  children  found  the 
monitoring acceptable and even took advantage of it, either 
because the monitoring had no immediate consequences for 
them (no new imposed rules) or because the children used 
the data in their own favour, e.g. to prove their own case. In 
contrast, Ur et al. (2006) found that girls would avoid using 
public family PCs for private communication.  

While these insights provide one contribution of our study, 
in  the  following  we  will  illustrate  how  such  monitoring 
technology  influences  spontaneous  information  disclosure 
and  trust  and  how  such  data  and  data  sharing  affected 
children’s behaviour and mobility. 

Information Disclosure and Monitoring Technology 
Our study highlighted aspects of information disclosure and 
perhaps the lack of voluntary and spontaneous information 
disclosure. In summary, we discovered that the monitoring 
technology  led  to  fewer  opportunities  for  building  trust 
between the children and the parents because it decreased 
the children’s possibilities for being untrustworthy. We will 
elaborate in the following. 

As we discussed earlier parental trust becomes increasingly 
important, as children grow up and spend more time away 
from  home.  Kerr  et  al.  (1999)  argue  that  parental  trust 
builds on knowledge of daily activities and this knowledge 
should  come  from  voluntary  and  spontaneous  child 
disclosure. However, because our parents had access to the 
Fitbit  data,  they  already  had  knowledge  about  activities 
such as when and if their children had been active. Parents 
used  this  data  to  infer  what  their  children  were  doing,  or 
had been doing, and sometimes this would trigger them to 
ask the children questions or enforce rules or restrictions. 

The monitoring using Fitbit data meant that the parents no 
longer  needed  to  gain  their  children’s  trust  in  order  to  get 
access to activity information or sleep information. We saw 
that it would occasionally prohibit spontaneous information 
disclosure from the child, but provide the parents some sort 
of control. The latter resonates well with parental control as 

7

 
illustrated  by  Kerr  et  al.  (1999)  who  argue  that  a  high 
degree of control might make parents more trusting because 
they feel that the child's behavior is highly predictable as it 
is under their control. This was identified in more situations 
for our participants. But it seems to come at a cost, namely 
that monitoring can lead to fewer opportunities for building 
trust between children and parents because trustworthiness 
can only be displayed if the possibility of untrustworthiness 
(2003).  Our  study 
exists  –  as  argued  by  Mayer 
demonstrated  that  monitoring  technologies  decrease  the 
possibilities for being untrustworthy. 

Mobility and Monitoring Technology 
The  pervasiveness  of  wearable  and  mobile technology  has 
resulted in several opportunities for both tracking and self-
tracking,  e.g.  research  studies  have  investigated  wearable 
technology for self-tracking of fitness and physical activity 
(e.g. Choe et al., 2014; Fritz et al., 2014).  

We  adapted  the  wearable  fitness  tracker  (Fitbit)  for  our 
study  and  thus,  the  Fitbit  wristband  became  a  monitoring 
technology that enabled the parents to track their children’s 
physical activity and sleep, but it also enabled the children 
to self-track. Both the former and latter influenced how the 
children acted and behaved. 

Boesen  et  al.  (2014)  studied  location  tracking  in  families 
and  found  that  knowledge  of  location  within  families  and 
the use of such knowledge are highly complex and cyclical. 
We observed similar aspects in our study and while we did 
not  include  direct  location  tracking,  data  on  activity  and 
sleep  can  also  be  interpreted  and  was  often  linked  to 
location  or  whereabouts.  For  example,  when  a  child  was 
doing  sports,  parents  assumed  that  this  could  be  directly 
seen  in  the  data.  Therefore,  some  children  optimized  their 
data by  walking  longer walks with the dog or when  going 
home from school.  

CONCLUSION 
We studied sleep and physical activity data of children and 
shared these  data  in their  families to investigate how  such 
data  sharing  influenced  the  relationship  between  children 
and their parents. We were particularly interested in seeing 
how  this  could  affect  parental  trust.  Our  study  presented 
insights  into  how  parents  interpret  children’s  activity  and 
sleep data and how this would trigger them to question their 
children.  This  led  to  increased  parental  control  as  they 
could control or verify children’s responses to the collected 
data.  However,  it  also  reduced  spontaneous  and  voluntary 
information disclosure from the children. 

Our  study  suffers  from  a  number  of  limitations.  First,  we 
interviewed  the  children  while  their  parents  were  home  at 
the same time. This was necessary for ethical reasons, but it 
could  have  influenced  the  children’s  answers  even  though 
the  parents  typically  weren’t  directly  present  or  in  close 
proximity.  Secondly,  the  relatively  short  duration  of  our 
study  is  another  limitation  in  terms  of  how  generalizable 
the  results  are.  We  clearly  identified  some  novelty  effects 
of the Fitbit technology. Finally, children (9-12 years) will 
clearly  have  an  effect  on  the  findings,  because  children 

8

grow  up  and  they  become  more  independent.  Therefore, 
older  children  might  have  exhibited  different  attitudes  if 
being  monitored  by  their  parents.  Future  studies  could 
consider  age  issues  and  differences  for  surveillance  in 
families. 

We  discovered  that  our  study  clearly  introduced  new 
aspects  of  surveillance in the  participating  families,  which 
should not be done without some ethical considerations. In 
this respect, it was important for us that the children were 
aware of  what data was being collected, and that they had 
equal access to the data, and in fact used it as much as their 
parents throughout the study. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  would  like  to  thank  the  participants  in  our  study  and 
comments  from  several  anonymous  reviewers  in  previous 
drafts of the paper.  

REFERENCES 
Bentley, F. R. and Metcalf, C.J. Sharing Motion 

Information with Close Family and Friends. In Proc. CHI 
2007, ACM (2007), 1361-1370. 

Boesen, J., Rode, J. and Mancini, C. The Domestic 

Panopticon: Location Tracking in Families. In Proc. 
UbiComp 2010, ACM (2010), 65-74. 

Brown, B., Taylor, A. S. Izadi, S., Sellen, A., Kaye, J. and 
Eardley, R. Locating family values: A field trial of the 
Whereabouts Clock. In Proc. UbiComp 2007, ACM 
(2007), 354-371.  

Choe, E. K., Lee, N. B., Lee, B., Pratt, W. and Kientz, J.A. 
Understanding quantified-selfers' practices in collecting 
and exploring personal data. In Proc. CHI 2014, ACM 
(2014), 1143-1152.  

Consolvo, S., Smith, I. E., Mathhews, T., LaMarca, A., 

Tabert, J. and Powledge, P. Location Disclosure to Social 
Relations: Why, When, and What People Want to Share. 
In Proc. CHI 2005, ACM (2005), 81-90. 

Czeskis, A., Dermendjieva, I., Yapit, H., Borning, A., 

Friedman, B., Gill, B. and Kohno, T. Parenting from the 
pocket: value tensions and technical directions for secure 
and private parent-teen mobile safety. In Proc. SOUPS 
2010, ACM (2010), article 15.  

Dalsgaard, T., Skov, M. B. and Thomassen, B. eKISS: 

sharing experiences in families through a picture blog. In 
Proc. BCS-HCI 2007, ACM (2007), 67-75.  

Fritz, T.,. Huang, E.M., Murphy, G. C. and Zimmermann, 
T. Persuasive Technology in the Real World: A Study of 
Long-Term Use of Activity Sensing Devices for Fitness. 
In Proc. CHI 2014, ACM (2014), 487-496.  

Gammon, D., Årsand, E., Walseth, O. E., Andersson, N., 

Jenssen, M. and Taylor, T. Parent-child interaction using 
a mobile and wireless system for blood glucose 
monitoring. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 7, 5 
(2005), e57.  

 
Graham, C., Cheverst, K., Howard, S., Kjeldskov, J. and 
Vetere, F. Trust in mobile guide design: exploiting 
interaction paradigms. In Proc. OzCHI 2004, CHISIG 
(2004). 

Kerr, M., Stattin, H. and Trost, K. To know you is to trust 

you: Parents' trust is rooted in child disclosure of 
information. Journal of Adolescence, 22, 6 (1999), 737-
752.  

Lyon, David. Surveillance studies: An overview. Polity, 

2007. 

Mancini, C., Rogers, Y., Thomas, K., Joinson, A. N., Price, 
B. A., Bandara, A. K., Jedrzejczyk, L. and Nuseibeh, B. 
In the best families: tracking and relationships. In Proc. 
CHI 2011,  ACM (2011), 2419-2428.  

March, W. and Fleuriot, C. Girls, Technology and Privacy: 
“Is My Mother Listening?” In Proc. CHI 2006, ACM 
(2006), 107-110. 

Mayer, R. N. Technology, Families, and Privacy: Can We 
Know Too Much About Our Loved Ones? Journal of 
Consumer Policy, 26, 4 (2003), 419-439.  

PC Tattletale. http://www.pctattletale.com. 

Rode, J. A. 2009. Digital parenting: designing children's 

safety. In Proc. BCS-HCI 2009, ACM (2009), 244-251.  

Rotenberg, K. J. 1995. The Socialisation of Trust: Parents’ 
and Children’s Interpersonal Trust. International Journal 
of Behavioral Development, 18, 4 (1995), 713-726.  

Torremante, L., Koester, A. and Heinze, J. Mobile 

Recommender Systems: Trust and Context-Awareness. 
In Proc. MobileHCI 2015, ACM (2015), 781-788.  

Toscos, T., Connelly, K. and Rogers, Y. Best intentions: 

health monitoring technology and children. In Proc. CHI 
2012, ACM (2012), 1431-1440.  

Yardi, S. and Bruckman, A. Social and technical challenges 
in parenting teens' social media use. In Proc. CHI 2011, 
ACM (2011), 3237-3246.  

Ur, B., Jung, J., and Schechter, S. Intruders versus 

intrusiveness: teens' and parents' perspectives on home-
entryway surveillance. In Proc. UbiComp 2014, ACM 
(2014), 129-139. 

Vasalou, A., Oostveen, A-M. and Joinson, A. N. A case 

study of non-adoption: the values of location tracking in 
the family. In Proc. CSCW 2012, ACM (2012), 779-788.  

9

 
 
 
