MoodLight: Exploring Personal and Social Implications of 
Ambient Display of Biosensor Data  

Jaime Snyder°, Mark Matthews°, Jacqueline Chien°, Pamara F. Chang*,  
Emily Sun°, Saeed Abdullah°, Geri Gay°* 
Cornell University 
°Information Science Department 
*Department of Communication 
{js2829, mark.matthews,  jtc229, pfc46, es765, sma249, gkg1} @cornell.edu 

ABSTRACT 
MoodLight  is  an  interactive  ambient  lighting  system  that 
responds  to  biosensor  input  related  to  an  individual’s 
current  level  of  arousal.  Changes  in  levels  of  arousal 
correspond to fluctuations in the color of light provided by 
the  system,  altering  the  immediate  environment  in  ways 
intimately related to the user’s private internal state. We use 
this intervention to explore personal and social implications 
of  the  ambient  display  of  biosensor  data.  This  study 
provides  greater  understanding  of  the  ways  in  which  the 
representations  of  personal  informatics,  with  a  focus  on 
ambient  feedback,  influence  our  perceptions  of  ourselves 
and those around us.  

Author Keywords 
Personal informatics; self-discovery; biofeedback; stress 
management; light; color; ambient display. 

ACM Classification Keywords  
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 

INTRODUCTION 

“To  reveal  is  to  allow  to  be  known  what  has 
heretofore been hidden (a passive act)…and to 
disclose 
to  make  known  an 
occurrence  that  has  been  under  consideration 
but,  for  valid  reasons,  has  been  kept  under 
wraps” [22, p. 238]. 

to  act, 

is 

We are now several years into an era of biosensor research 
in  the  field  of  human  computer  interaction  [cf.  19].  The 
devices  for  gathering  micro-metric  data  about  even  the 
smallest  fluctuations  in  our  biological  forms  are  shrinking 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CSCW '15, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada. 
Copyright 2015 ACM 978-1-4503-2922-4/15/03…$15.00. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675191 

in  size,  becoming  more  reliable  and  are  increasingly  and 
seamlessly integrated into our environments. 

Much  of  the  research  in  this  area  has  been  motivated  by  a 
desire  to  reveal  more  about  ourselves  and  to  provide  users 
with tools to cultivate an increased sense of self-awareness. 
For example, Affective Health [10; 31] is a bio-sensing tool 
designed to support stress management by helping people to 
track  trends  associated  with  the  response  the  body  has  to 
day-to-day  activities  and  environments.  Like  similar 
systems  [e.g.,  5;  26],  Affective  Health  uses  a  combination 
of skin conductance, heart rate and accelerometer sensors to 
collect data that are displayed on a user’s mobile phone in 
real-time. The designers of this system have explained that 
“by  finding  patterns  in  their  own  behavior,  users  can  start 
[to  figure]  out  both  what  stresses  them  and  how  to  cope” 
[31, p. 48].  

this  and  similar  work,  we  created 
Extending  from 
Moodlight,  an  interactive  ambient  lighting  system  that 
responds  to  an  individual’s  physiological  markers  of 
arousal.  We  were  interested  in  learning  more  about  the 
mechanics  of  self-awareness  provided  by  real-time  display 
of  an  individual’s  biosensor  data,  particularly  in  social 
contexts.  We  wanted  to  investigate  how  the  representation 
of  self  that  is  offered  by  these  systems  interacts  with  and 
influences  an  individual’s  own  sense  of  wellbeing.  Bio-
sensor  systems  for  self-awareness  carry  the  benefits  of 
ubiquitous  and  automatic  data  collection  but  also  embody 
real risks associated with removing control from users [16; 
19].  These  systems  challenge 
the  ways  we  have 
traditionally  thought  about  the  process  of  self-discovery 
[33] and  intentionality of self-disclosure [21]. 

MOTIVATION 
The motivation for MoodLight grew out of two focus group 
sessions  and  a  series  of  conversations  with  clinicians  who 
provide  mental  health  counseling  to  college  students,  a 
population  particularly  susceptible  to  stress  [9;  34].  For 
these  mental  health  practitioners,  working  with  students  to 
cultivate  successful  stress  management  skills  typically 
involves  assessing 
levels,  encouraging  non-
judgmental  self-awareness  through  talk  therapy,  teaching 

stress 

Mood and EmotionCSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada143 
 
 
 
traditional  relaxation  tools  such  as  deep  breathing  and,  in 
particular,  mindfulness  meditation,  a  stress  management 
technique  which  places  an  emphasis  on  developing  a 
detached awareness of momentary cognitive and emotional 
experience.  Research 
that 
cultivating  a  sense  of  non-judgmental  mindfulness  or 
awareness  of  present-moment  experience  can  produce 
substantial 
in  wellbeing,  especially  for 
people suffering from pain and distress [1; 4].  

in  psychology  has  shown 

improvements 

that  many  students  find 

it 
The  counselors  reported 
extremely  challenging  to  practice  relaxation  techniques, 
like mindfulness meditation, both at home and in the clinic. 
One  counselor  explained:  “Students  can  self-experiment 
with some of the therapeutic exercises but I don’t feel that 
they actually reflect on these experiments, It would be nice 
to have a way to help them reflect, [to] provide convincing 
evidence [that it works].”   

Another therapist mentioned the benefits of supporting self-
discovery  in  social  contexts  by  making  feelings  and 
emotions  “more  concrete,”  visually  representing  them  not 
only to the individual but also to others in a group session, 
thereby helping session members validate and acknowledge 
the  feelings  of  others.  She  anticipated  that  a visual  display 
might  be  particularly  helpful  for  students  who  lacked  or 
were  in  the  process  of  developing  a  vocabulary  for  their 
emotions.  A  third  clinician  commented  that  the  visual 
representation  of  an  internal  state  could  provide  the 
opportunity  for  students  to  reflect  on  and  accept  even 
negative  emotions  (their  own  or  others)  without  judgment, 
shutting  down  or  denying 
thereby 
supporting healthy self-discovery in the future.  

their  existence, 

With  input  from  these  clinicians,  a  design  probe  was 
deployed  to  observe  MoodLight  being  used  by  college 
students  singly  and  in  pairs.    During  the  study  we  spoke 
with  the  students  about  the  experience  of  seeing  their 
internal,  affective  state  represented  in  an  ambient  display. 
The  practical  goal  of  the  study  was  to  explore  the 
possibility  of  using  MoodLight  in  clinical  and  home 
settings to cultivate mindfulness, provide a novel outlet for 
stress  management 
enhance 
self-discovery, 
interventions  by  supporting  social  engagement.  Our  more 
formative  goal  was  to  use  this  domain  to  look  more 
reflectively  at  the  process  of  self-represention  through  the 
use of biosensor data and the ways in which this influences 
our perceptions of ourselves and those around us.  

and 

RELATED WORK 

Technology for mindfulness  
A  variety  of  intervention  techniques  have  been  used  to 
encourage self-awareness including mindfulness meditation 
[13],  breathing  exercises,  progressive  muscle  relaxation 
[25], and acceptance and commitment therapy [30].  Many 
people, however, find mindful practices such as meditation 
difficult  to  learn  and  apply  in  daily  life  [4].  Also,  many 
traditional  approaches  to  self-awareness  are  practiced  in 

isolation,  making  it  challenging  to  support  the  stress 
management process through positive social engagement. 

One  prominent  example  of  technology-based  interventions 
to support self-reflection and relaxation is biofeedback [33]. 
This  technique  involves  using  sensor  technologies  to 
measure  and  represent  changes  in  typically  automatic 
biological  signals  like  heart  rate,  skin  conductance  and 
brain  activity  in  order  to  learn  how  to  voluntarily  control 
them.  Biofeedback  research  in  the  domain  of  human 
computer  interaction  typically  involves  designing  systems 
that  combine  one  or  more  of  these  detection  techniques  in 
order  to  provide  users  with  an  enhanced  ability  to  track 
their own behaviors and activities. For example, Microsoft 
Research’s Food and Mood project [5] deploys biofeedback 
in  the  service  of  intervention  and  behavior  change.  Users 
wear  sensors  embedded  in  their  clothing  in  order  to  track 
behaviors  and  affective  states  associated  with  emotional 
eating  so  that  they  can  curb  undesirable  habits.  The 
Affective Health project mentioned above uses a similar set 
of biometric collection points with the goal of empowering 
users  with  the  ability  to  interpret  and  find  their  own 
meaning in the signals as a reflective practice. 

Biofeedback and similar affective systems are often screen-
based,  providing  sensor  output  via  a  digital  graphical 
display. Some systems present feedback through traditional 
data  visualizations  while  others  use  visual  metaphors.  For 
example,  AffectAura  measures  head  position,  posture, 
voice  activity,  electrodermal  activity  (EDA),  and  GPS  to 
provide participants with an interactive visualization of the 
user’s  predicted  affective  state  [26].The  team  involved  in 
designing and developing the Affective Health system have 
explored more lyrical expressions of the temporal aspect of 
biosensor data through displays based on layers and spirals 
[36].  

As the devices for collecting and displaying biosensor data 
become more refined, attention is shifting to the position of 
these  systems  within  social  contexts.  Although  not  yet  a 
standard component of  collaborative work interfaces, there 
is  great  potential  for  biosensor  feedback  to  be  used  as  a 
means for cultivating co-presence and awareness, especially 
in  distributed  contexts.  For  example,  mood  sharing 
applications  like  MobiMood  [6]  and  the  MoodJam  project 
[27]  encourage  awareness  of  the  emotion  climate  or 
collective mood of a shared space.  

Self-revelation and automated disclosure 
We  chose  an  ambient  output  for  our  system  in  order  to 
explore  both 
impacts  of 
the  personal  and  social 
representations of self generated from biosensor data. Based 
on ubiquitous computing investigations of the mechanics of 
automated  disclosure  [21;  32],  we  anticipated  that  there 
would  be  interesting  tensions  between  the  passive  and 
automatic process of self-revelation provided by the sensing 
device  and  traditional  practices  of  self-disclosure  that  are 
typically  characterized  by  intentionality.  In  particular,  we 

Mood and EmotionCSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada144found  through  the  process  of  designing  the  MoodLight 
system  that  our  own  understanding  of  the  nature  of  these 
practices of revelation and disclosure were challenged.  

Self-revelation  refers  to  the  passive  and  often  inadvertent 
act of exposing something about yourself in a tacit manner 
[11;  22].  For  example,  we  reveal  clues  about  personality, 
preferences  and  disposition  through  body  language,  the 
arrangement  of  our  personal  spaces,  and  even  through  the 
silences in our speech patterns. Levenson [22] describes the 
process  of  self-revelation  in  social  situations  as  inevitable, 
inadvertent and continuous. The practice of recognizing and 
interpreting  the  unconscious  self-revelations  of  others  is 
poetically  referred  to  by  Levenson  as  “exquisite  attention” 
[22, p. 239]. In this sense, biosensor tools offer us a means 
to  cast  “exquisite  attention”  on  ourselves,  enabling  us  to 
notice  subtle  and  unattended  details  that  signal  internal 
states of being.  

sharing 

research 

personally 

sensitive 
that 

On the other hand, self disclosure traditionally refers to “an 
interaction  between  at  least  two  individuals  where  one 
intends  to  deliberately  divulge  something  personal  to 
another” [12, p. 411]. In spite of cultural and social taboos 
against 
information, 
self-disclosure, 
indicates 
psychology 
especially  to  friends  and  family  members,  can  play  an 
important role in constructing relationships and coping with 
stressful  or  traumatic  events  [cf.  12].  Greene  et  al.  [12] 
posit  that  nondisclosure,  especially  in  stressful  situations 
such  as  being  informed  of  a  serious  illness,  correlates  to 
psychological 
cognitive 
processing  and  other  physical  symptoms  of  anxiety.  Not 
only do mindfulness practices help us to mitigate stress by 
encouraging  non-judgmental  self-awareness  of  negative 
feelings, but they can also lead to the intentional expression 
these emotions to others [1; 4].  

suppression 

inhibition, 

of 

Recent  research  looking  at  computer-mediated  interactions 
has  shown  that  the  perceived  anonymity  offered  by  online 
environments  can  affect  our  disclosure  practices,  often 
encouraging  more  spontaneous  sharing  of  personal  details 
[17;  35].  While  users  largely  remain  in  control  of  self-
disclosure  decisions  on  social  media  sites  through  the 
voluntary  nature  of  posts,  with  sensor-based  systems  that 
can  passively  and  continuously  track  personal  information 
there are risks associated with automated disclosure [cf. 21; 
32].  Managing  disclosure  in  daily  life  “is  an  intuitive, 
situated  social  process”  [21,  p.  2]  while  managing 
disclosure  in  ubiquitous  computing  is  complicated  by  the 
seamlessness  with  which  these  systems  strive  to  operate. 
Lederer  et  al.  looked  at  ways  to  support  intentional 
disclosure  in  ubiquitous  systems,  particularly  where  the 
data  may  be  disclosed  automatically  [20;  21].  They 
identified  a  tension  between  the  risk  of  unintentional 
revelation of personal information and the burden of having 
users  provide  permission  for  the  release  of  each  piece  of 
information  about  themselves  to  which  the  system  has 
access.  

intentional  acquiescence 

Our  study  was  designed  to  probe  representations  of  self 
through  biosensor  data  by  focusing  on  the  blurred  line 
between  inevitably  inadvertent  self-revelation  and  the 
mechanics  of  automated  disclosure.  When  users  make  the 
explicit  choice  to  use  sensing  technology,  this  can  be  seen 
as 
to  automated  disclosure 
(especially  when  the  system  is  embedded  in  a  social 
context). However, in many current systems, users quickly 
lose  control  of 
their  personal 
those  data  points  as 
information is fed into a complex system [16]. What might 
have  begun  as  an  act  of  intentional  disclosure  becomes  an 
experience  of  passive  self-revelation 
[22,  p.  240]. 
Understanding  this  shift  should  be  of  particular  concern  to 
researchers 
the  CSCW  community  who  envision 
exploiting  affective  and  bio-sensing  technologies  in  the 
service  of  establishing  and  maintaining  trust,  cohesion  and 
coordination in distributed teams. 

in 

Summary 
The capacity for bio-sensing tools to support self-awareness 
has  been  the  subject  of  previous  work.  However,  as  these 
tools  become  more  seamlessly  embedded  in  our  everyday 
lives, the data and representations of self that they offer are 
increasingly  integrated  into  our  social  landscape.  We 
contribute  to  this  work  by  viewing  representations  of  self 
that are offered by bio-sensing systems in terms of not just 
self-awareness  and  mindfulness  practices,  but  also  within 
the  context  of  more  socially  grounded  practices  of  self-
revelation and evolving notions of automated disclosure. 

DESIGN OF MOODLIGHT 

is  no 

longer  a  specialized 

Design considerations 
The  first  design  consideration  we  addressed  dealt  with  the 
recent  surge  of  interest  in  personal  informatics  systems 
driven  by  low-level  biometric  and  movement  sensors  [38]. 
Biofeedback 
therapeutic 
technique.  Readily  available  sensor-based  activity  trackers 
like the Basis wristwatch (http://www.mybasis.com) enable 
individuals  to  use  high-frequency  sampling  of  low-level 
outputs  in  order  to  see  a  view  of  themselves  that  was 
previously  unavailable.  This  information  provides  new 
opportunities  for  self-awareness:  Do  I  recognize  myself  in 
this  micro-level  data?  We  were  interested  in  investigating 
these representations in the context of self-discovery.  

Second, we were sensitive to students’ vulnerabilities when 
it  comes  to  the  relationship  between  avoidance  behaviors 
and technology use [23]. Avoidance behavior, a by-product 
of stress, refers to any activity a person engages in to avoid 
facing a source of stress, resulting in a negative impact on 
everyday 
include  gambling,  watching 
television,  and  playing  computer  games.  According  to  the 
American  Psychiatric  Association’s  Diagnostic 
and 
Statistical  Manual  of  Mental  Disorders  (DSM-5),  newly 
identified conditions such as Internet addiction could be the 
result of a strong relationship between technology use and a 
range  of  avoidance  behaviors.  Because  of  this  connection, 

life.  Examples 

Mood and EmotionCSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada145the  design  for  MoodLight  system  needed  to  remove  the 
screen  and  introduce  an  element  of  ambient  experience  to 
users. 

Third,  in  order  to  support  social  engagement,  we  designed 
the  system  around  the  notion  of  playful  interaction,  with 
two  modes:  single  play  and  paired  play.  It  is  a  passive, 
ambient  display  that  encodes  output  as  colored  light. 
During  single  play,  the  system  responds  to  input  from  an 
individual.  In  the  paired  play,  biometric  data  from  both 
participants is combined to produce a visible representation 
of  their  shared  interaction.  We  did  not  present  a  specific 
goal to participants, but encouraged open-ended exploration 
of the system.  

System description 
The  MoodLight  system  consists  of  EDA  sensors,  an 
android  device,  a  series  of  commercially  available 
programmable  light  bulbs  produced  under  the  HUE  brand 
by Philips, and a set of desk lamps. Using this technology, 
it is possible to change the color and/or intensity of the light 
cast by the bulbs in response to changes in arousal. 

in 

the  MoodLight  system, 

Measuring arousal 
The  Personal  Input  Pod  (PiP),  a  commercially  available 
sensor  used 
is  a  novel 
implementation  of  standard  EDA  technology  (Figure  1, 
left).  The  PiP  sensors  are  about  2cm  wide  by  3cm  long, 
non-invasive  and  are  held  lightly  between  the  participant's 
thumb and forefinger (Figure 1, left). When the participant 
makes contact with two separate metal plates on either side 
of  the  device,  a  safe  and  imperceptible  electric  charge  (13 
microamps)  is  passed  through  the  fingers.  The  level  of 
conductance  is  then  measured.  Readings  are  taken  at 
regular intervals in order to establish trends of increasing or 
decreasing arousal for an individual. 

EDA  sensors  can  detect  changes  in  an  individual's  arousal 
levels  via  the  autonomic  nervous  system  by  measuring 
subtle changes in skin conductivity [8]. The amplitude and 
rise  time  of  EDA  pulses  vary  between  individuals  making 
direct comparisons challenging. The algorithm for assessing 
changes in individual EDA levels takes this into account by 
applying  Least  Means  Squares  (LMS)  on  successive 
windows of data to determine the slope of the EDA curve, 
and also uses a threshold up/down counter to reject spurious 
peaks/troughs.  An  accumulator  is  used  to  increment  the 
arousal  trend  in  one  direction  (stressed)  or  the  other 
(relaxed).  While  EDA  sensors  can  detect  arousal,  or  a 
heightening  response  to  stimuli,  they  cannot  disambiguate 
whether an individual perceives that sensation of arousal as 
positive  or  negative.  EDA  levels  between  individuals  can 
vary greatly depending on age, skin type and other factors. 
For  initial  testing,  the  system  used  a  generic  profile  for 
interpretation of EDA data. 

Figure 1. PiP (left) and setup (right) 

Interactive lighting 
MoodLight  uses  the  Philips  HUE  interactive  lighting 
system  hardware  and  API  [29].  The  system  includes 
programmable  LED  light  bulbs  and  a  wireless  bridge  that 
enables  the  lights  to  communicate.  Three  types  of  LED, 
producing a relatively wide range of colors and intensities, 
define  the  color  profile  of  the  lights.  MoodLight  has  been 
initially  optimized  to  work  within  the  range  of  colors 
available through this system, mapping to ten discrete hues 
(Figure  2),  with  transitions  moving  from  magenta-red  to 
blue-violet (discussed below). 

Figure 2. Ten hues representing the MoodLight color range, 
with red at the top of the circle, moving clockwise to orange, 
yellow, green, white and blue-violet 

EDA readings are sent via bluetooth to an Android device, 
which  in  turn  sends  a  signal  to  the  programmable  light 
bulbs.  This  information  is  used  to  control  the  hue  of 
ambient 
room,  essentially 
controlling  the  output  of  the  lights  with  input  representing 
the participant’s current level of arousal.  

lighting  conditions 

in  a 

During  use,  a  participant  holds  the  PiPs  between  their 
fingers  (Figure  1, 
left).  The  EDA  sensors  pick  up 
levels  of  arousal. 
increasing,  decreasing  or  stable 
Depending  on  the  signal,  the  lights  change  color,  with 
increasing  arousal  triggering  a  transition  to  warmer  (red) 
end  of  the  spectrum  and  decreasing  arousal  signaling  the 
lights  to  transition  to  the  cooler  (blue-violet)  end  of  the 
spectrum.  When  either  end  of  the  scale  is  reached,  a  soft 
chime sounds. 

Light, color and affect 
There  are  multiple  theories  regarding  color,  emotion, 
culture and physiology [cf. 3; 40]. Researchers have shown 
that exposure to light has both visual and biological effects 
[18;  37];  there  are  non-visual,  biological  impacts  of  being 
exposed  to  certain  colors  or  levels  of  light  under  different 
circumstances.  One  example  of  this  type  of  effect  is  the 
influence  of  light  on  circadian  rhythms.  There  is  also 

Mood and EmotionCSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada146 
 
support for a positive association between arousal and color 
wavelength.  Walters  et  al.  [37]  showed  that  subjects  who 
made  color  preferences  throughout  the  day  exhibited  a 
systematic  tendency  for  long-wavelength  colors  (towards 
the  red  end  of  the  spectrum)  to  induce  feelings  of  high 
arousal  and  short-wavelength  colors  (towards  blue)  to 
induce feelings of low arousal.  

Supported  by  this  research  and  a  pilot  study  exploring 
associations  between  different  colors  of  light  and  levels  of 
stress  and  relaxation,  we  designed  MoodLight  with  the 
anticipation  that  most  participants  would  associate  relaxed 
states  with  cooler  colors 
like  blue  and  purple  and 
heightened  levels  of  arousal  with  warm  colors  such  as  red 
and orange. 

METHOD 
There is limited research that makes an association between 
face-to-face  public  display  of  personal  information  and 
social  dynamics  of  self-discovery;  therefore,  we  designed 
an  open-ended  protocol  that  would  allow  us  to  observe 
participants  using  the  system  both  on  their  own  and  in  the 
presence of a friend or acquaintance.  

Our  study  included  four  stages:  1)  a  preliminary  interview 
during  which  we  learned  about  participants’  relationship 
with  stress;  2)  interaction  with  the  MoodLight  system 
singly  providing  an  opportunity  to  explore  the  relationship 
between  the  system  and  self-discovery;  3)  interaction  with 
the  system  in  pairs  during  which  we  observed  a  range  of 
behaviors  associated  with  emergent  self-awareness  in  a 
social  context;  and  4)  an  exit  interview  during  which  we 
asked  participants  to  reflect  on  their  experience  with 
MoodLight.  

Each  recruit  for  the  study  was  asked  to  bring  a  friend  or 
acquaintance when they came to the lab to participate in the 
study.  All  individuals  completed  a  preliminary  interview 
and individual session, and those who were able to bring a 
companion also participated in the second paired session. 

Setup 
Two empty offices in an academic department close to the 
center  of  campus  were  used  to  run  the  study.  Decorations, 
personal items and unneeded furniture were removed from 
the rooms. A table was set up in each room with a chair on 
either  side,  one  for  the  researcher  and  one  for  the 
participant.  A  plain  white  cloth  was  spread  over  each 
desktop. There was a laptop computer in each room, as well 
as two desk lamps, each utilizing a programmable light bulb 
(Figure 1, right). 

Protocol 

Preliminary interviews 
A preliminary interview gathered information about typical 
experiences  of  stress  and  actions  taken  to  mitigate  stress. 
We asked participants about typical sources of stress, steps 

taken  to  mitigate  negative  feelings  and  the  role  that  social 
interaction played in their approach to stress management.  

including  an  explanation  of 

Single and Pair Play 
Individual  sessions  began  with  a  brief  introduction  to  the 
MoodLight  system, 
the 
relationship  between  typical  experiences  of  stress  and 
relaxation in relation to the arousal data used in the system. 
Individual participants were asked to playfully interact with 
the MoodLight system by trying to make the lights respond 
to  their  EDA  input  (Figure  3).  Most  participants  engaged 
with  the  system  for  approximately  10  minutes  before 
indicating  that  they  were  ready  to  move  on  to  the  next 
phase  of  the  study.  At  that  point,  a  partner  participant  was 
brought into the room.  

For  the  paired  interactions  with  the  MoodLight  system 
(Figure 4), each individual held one of the PiPs. The lights 
were  controlled  using  the  aggregate  of  EDA  input  from 
both  participants.  We  chose  to  combine  the  signals  in  the 
output in order to emulate the experience of being involved 
in  a  face-to-face  conversation  where  it  is  not  always 
completely clear who contributes what to the overall tone or 
mien of the discussion. For example, it is not uncommon to 
find  oneself  in  a  tense  discussion  with  a  spouse  or  partner 
and  have  competing  beliefs  about  who  instigated  the 
conflict. 

During  paired  interactions,  the  color  encoding  used  was 
similar  to  that  of  the  individual  version,  signaling  changes 
in level of arousal with warmer color for increasing arousal 
and  cooler  color  for  decreasing  arousal.  For  the  pairs,  we 
added  an  additional  representation  of  synchronicity.  When 
both  participants  were  “in  sync,”  meaning  both  were 
simultaneously experiencing either increasing or decreasing 
arousal,  the  light  became  brighter.  This  was  intended  to 
function  similarly  to  the  many  ways  we  typically  signal 
conversational  coordination  and  involvement,  such  as 
mirroring  body  language,  aligning  speech  patterns  and 
synchronizing vocabulary. 

Participants were not asked to complete a specific task, but 
were encouraged to playfully engage the system with their 
partner. Many participants began by negotiating a goal; for 
example,  whether 
to  cooperate  by 
simultaneously  trying  to  reach  an  aroused  or  un-aroused 
state  or  try  to  compete  by  trying  to reach  opposite  ends  of 
the  spectrum.  When  the  paired  participants  had  exhausted 
their play, they moved on to individual exit interviews. 

they  would 

try 

Exit interview 
At the conclusion of their session, participants were asked a 
series  of  questions  about  their  interactions  with  the 
MoodLight  system.  They  were  asked  to  reflect  on  their 
abilities  to  control  the  lights,  the  appropriateness  of  colors 
in  reflecting  momentary  experiences  of  arousal,  and  how 
they might use MoodLight in their day-to-day lives. 

Mood and EmotionCSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada147Figure 3. Single play, light transitioning from blue (far left) to green (center) to red (right) 

Figure 4. Pair play, light transitioning from red (left) to blue-violet (center) to white (right) 

reasonably 

Participants 
Thirty participants were recruited at a large university in the 
northeast  of  the  US.  During  recruitment,  participants  were 
asked  to  bring  a  friend  for  the  paired  observations. 
Although  not  all  were  able  to  do  so,  many  of  the  paired 
participants  were  friends  or  acquaintances  prior  to  joining 
the study. This was a convenience sample, yet participants 
were 
the  underlying 
representative  of 
population.  Our  sample  consisted  of  68.8%  undergraduate 
postdoctoral 
students, 
postgraduates, 
researchers 
(underlying 
population: 66% undergrad, 33.5% postgrad). Genders were 
evenly  distributed  at  50%,  compared  to  underlying  sample 
of  51.5%  male,  48.5%  female.    Most  participants  (87.5%) 
were  in  the  18  to  25  age  range,  with  the  rest  being  26-34 
years of age. The ethnic background of participants (59.5% 
American,  28.1%  non-American  and  rest  unknown)  is 
similar  to  the  underlying  population  (64.7%  American, 
29.6% non-American and rest unknown).  

3.1% 
staff  members 

and  9.5% 

21.8% 

All 30 individuals completed the preliminary interview and 
were observed interacting with the MoodLight individually; 
and 22 were observed using the system in groups of two (11 
pairs).  

Analysis 
Qualitative analysis of individual and paired play involved 
reviewing field notes from all sessions; audio recordings of 
interviews 
interviews  and  27  exit 
recording 
interviews  due 
equipment); and video recordings when available (26 single 
play videos, 9 pair play videos).  

(30  preliminary 

issues  with 

technical 

to 

practices 

RESULTS 
Our  analysis  focused  on  (1)  observing  verbal  and  non-
verbal 
during 
engagement with the MoodLight system singly and in pairs; 
and (2) specific statements made by participants during play 
with the system or interviews in response to emergent self-
awareness, self-discovery and representations of self.  

self-revelation 

related 

to 

Engagement with MoodLight 
All participants were able to intentionally change the color 
of  the  lights  either  by  relaxing  or  stressing.  Participants 
reported  that  in  order  to  reach  the  high-arousal  end  of  the 
continuum, they tried to think about a stressful situation in 
their  current  or  recent  experiences  (62%);  made  a  mental 
to-do  list  (15%);  performed  physical  activities  such  as 
jumping,  running  in  place  or  doing  push-ups  (15%);  or 
think about relationships (12%). When attempting to reach 
the low-arousal end of the scale, participants indicated that 
they  tried  some  sort  of  deep  breathing  technique  (54%), 
followed in frequency by thinking about something relaxing 
or  enjoyable  (42%)  like  visits  with  family  or  trips  to  the 
beach. Others talked about trying to clear their minds (19%) 
or thinking about nothing (12%). Only one person used the 
term “meditating” to describe these activities.  

Interestingly, there were a small number of people who said 
that they did not need to try to reduce their level of arousal 
(12%),  it  just  happened  naturally.  An  equal  number 
attempted to relax their neck and shoulders by rolling their 
head  or 
(12%).  A  smaller 
their  posture 
percentage  of  participants  told  us  that  they  simply  thought 
about  some  form  of  physical  activity  that  they  found 
relaxing (8%). 

loosening 

As  participants  tried  to  control  the  lights,  they  manifested 
outward, non-verbal indicators of their internal state. When 
attempting  to  become  increasingly  aroused,  they  exhibited 
some  common  physical  characteristics:  rapid  blinking, 
sitting  forward  in  their  chair,  staring  intently,  short  or 
constricted  breathing,  clenched  jaw,  and  increased  micro-
movements  or  fidgeting.  Participants  who  were  attempting 
to decrease arousal tended to close their eyes, to lean back 
in their chair, to keep their head/gaze turned downward, or 
to be very still. 

The  paradigm  of  playful  engagement  with  the  system 
enabled us to provide a minimal amount of structure to the 
paired  interactions  without  drawing  attention  to  a  specific 
goal.  In  fact,  most  paired  play  sessions  began  with  a 
negotiation  between  participants  regarding  whether  they 

Mood and EmotionCSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada148would try to get “stressed” or “relaxed,” or if they would try 
to  reach  opposite  ends  of  the  continuum.  While  social 
interactions  “in  the  wild”  do  not  always  explicitly  begin 
with 
this  sort  of  alignment  work,  we  know  from 
sociolinguistic  research  that  similar  implicit  coordination 
behaviors are highly typical in face-to-face interactions [14; 
39].  Regardless  of  the  strategy  selected,  during  the  paired 
play,  participants  used  many  of  the  same  techniques  they 
had  tried  during  single  play  (deep  breathing  to  decrease 
arousal,  fidgeting  or  other  tense  physical  movements  to 
increase arousal).  

During the single play observations, social interactions such 
as  asking  participants  to  describe  aloud  what  they  were 
experiencing  or  participants  asking 
the  researcher  a 
question  appeared  to  increase  the  arousal  level  of  some 
participants.  In  contrast,  during  paired  play,  informal 
chatting  appeared  to  reduce  arousal  in  some  people.  We 
observed  a  distinct  pattern  in  physical  proxemics  [24] 
between the pairs. When attempting to become increasingly 
aroused,  participants  were  more  likely  to  confront  each 
other, look each other in the eye, be facing each other, and 
mirror  each  other’s  movements.  When  attempting  to 
become less aroused, the pairs were more likely to sit at an 
angle  to  each  other,  to  not  make  direct  eye  contact  and  to 
curtail mimicking or mirroring behaviors. 

rewards  of 

technology-mediated  self-

Risks  and 
discovery 
Participant  quotes  from  exit  interviews  provided  some  of 
the  richest  insights  related  to  user  attitudes,  assumptions 
and  expectations  about  the  intersection  of  emergent  self-
the 
discovery  and  social  engagement  provided  by 
MoodLight  system.  Therefore,  we  focus  the  remainder  of 
the results on reporting these qualitative observations. 

Is that me? 
Through behaviors such as peeking at the lights after sitting 
with  eyes  closed  for  a  period  of  time,  it  was  clear  that 
participants  used  the  light  for  feedback  about  how  they 
were doing, as a tool for achieving the “exquisite attention” 
described by Levenson as a hallmark of self-revelation [22]. 
Although  the  majority  of  students  in  the  study  told  us  that 
they  know  when  they  are  stressed,  there  was  still  curiosity 
about  how  the  lights  would  represent  their  momentary 
arousal  level  and  transitions  between  states.  In  this  sense, 
the color of the light revealed to the participant information 
about  his  or  her  own  internal  affective  state.  A  student 
explained,  “When  I  saw  the  red  lights,  I  was,  like,  happy 
and I thought I was achieving what I wanted to do, so then I 
could relax and just take a deep breath.”  

Another  participant  also  expressed  a  belief  that  the  system 
would help her to see herself more clearly, imagining using 
the lights at home: “I can't fall asleep when I'm stressed and 
that'd  be  a  good  indicator  because  sometimes  I'm  not 
always aware."   

For some of the students, the representation of their internal 
state  was  not  a  welcome  discovery.  They  were  susceptible 
to a negative feedback loop created by the red light not only 
revealing  a  state  of  high  arousal,  but  at  times  causing 
elevations  in  stress  levels:  “Looking  at  the  light  makes  me 
stressed, so I am not going to look at it!” When asked about 
using  MoodLight  at  home,  a  participant  articulated  the 
tension  between 
the  unconscious  experience  of  self-
revelation  and  the  intentional  act  of  self-disclosure  by 
remarking that he did not “want to wear my emotions on my 
sleeve.”    Another  student  expressed  her  hesitation  by 
explaining:  “I  already  know  I'm  stressed  and  I  have 
these...lights  that  are  reflecting  how  I  feel  and  I  already 
know I'm having a bad day." 

thought 

During  exit  interviews  there  was  a  range  of  responses 
regarding  whether  people 
the  hue  was 
representative  of  how  they  were  feeling.  While  some 
thought the red and blue extremes accurately depicted their 
maximum  stress  and  relaxation  states,  others  thought  the 
colors  should  be  different.  One  participant  said  she  would 
have  preferred  a  soft  green  instead  of  blue-violet  at  the 
relaxed  end  since  she  considers  blue  to  be  sad  and  dark. 
Another participant thought the white color was equally as 
stressful as red.  

Although the students talked about customizing the color of 
the  lights,  surprisingly,  none  of  them  questioned  whether 
the  lights  were  accurately  representing  their  internal  state. 
Based  on  our  observations,  participants  had  different 
understandings  about  how  the  system  worked,  typically 
erring on the side of attributing omniscience to MoodLight, 
even when the output of the lights contrasted or conflicted 
with the way they were currently feeling. For example, one 
participant  felt  that  she  was  highly  aroused,  “stressed”  in 
her  words,  although  the  output  of  the  lights  was  a  steady 
blue-violet.  Rather  than  questioning  the  accuracy  of  the 
reading,  she  concluded,  “I  guess  I've  gotten  better  at  not 
being totally enraged.” 

two  pairs  continued 

Which one of us is that? 
Typically, participants initiated a paired session with a brief 
conversation  about  their  experience  interacting  with  the 
system singly and then decided on an approach to the paired 
session. Conversation generally dropped off after this initial 
coordination;  however, 
to  chat 
informally  about  a  range  of  topics  not  related  to  the  study 
for  the  duration  of  the  paired  play.  These  exchanges  were 
characterized  by  a  willingness  to  share  details  about  their 
personal  experiences  and  preferences,  clear  examples  of 
traditional  socially  driven  self-disclosure  that  stood  in 
contrast to the automated disclosure provided by the lamps. 
In  both  cases,  the  lights  indicated  a  high  degree  of 
coordination  and  steady  decrease  in  level  of  arousal.  The 
relaxed  state  achieved  by  the  two  chatting  pairs  supports 
observations  by  psychologists  that  healthy  self-disclosure 
has measurable physiological implications [12]. 

Mood and EmotionCSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada149In  the  majority  of  other  cases,  as  talking  decreased  there 
was  a  reduction  in  standard  markers  of  conversational 
involvement  such  as  mirroring  of  gestures  and  body 
position,  eye  contact,  leaning  towards  each  other  [15;  24]. 
Particularly when trying to decrease arousal, participants in 
a pair would often become silent, physically turn away from 
each  other  and  turn  gazes  downward  indicating  internal 
reflection.  During  exit  interviews,  we  learned  that,  in  fact, 
many  of  these  participants  were  engaged  in  a  form  of 
indirect  coordination.  Although  eyes  might  appear  closed, 
they  were  often  just  softened,  allowing  the  participants  to 
use  the  colored  light  reflecting  off  the  walls  and  ceiling  to 
gather  information  about  the  state  of  their  joint  interaction 
[7]. 

During  paired  interactions,  variations  in  the  lights  became 
not  only  an  external  representation  of  the  pairs  combined 
arousal  level,  but  also  a  collaborative  platform  for  the 
practice  of  passive  self-revelation  in  a  social  context.  This 
became  evident  through  statements  such  as,  “One  of  us  is 
getting stressed, that’s for sure!” as the room filled with a 
red-orange  glow.  Along  with  this  passive  self-revelation 
came a sense of responsibility: “I don’t want to be the one 
who turns it red.”  

We  saw  evidence  of  a  continuum  between  self-revelation 
and  automated  disclosure  through  statements  such  as,  "I 
don't want to be the person to just make the...light bad— or 
like  stressed  out,  so  I  tried  to  relax  myself  even  more."  
Another  student  felt  that  the  presence  of  another  person 
inhibited her ability to use the light in a reflective way:  

“I  just  felt  like  everything  that  we  tried  to  do  together 
we'd  get  like  the  opposite.  We  tried  to  relax  and  it  was 
stressful  lighting,  and  tried  to  get  pale  lighting  and  it 
was  a  dark  purplish.  So  it  was  kind  of  the  opposite  of 
what I was trying to achieve. But when I was by myself, 
I  was  like,  'I  want  a  pale  green,'  and  I  could  almost 
imagine what it would take to get that color."  

linguistic  adjustments 

The  passive  nature  of 
the  display  prompted  some 
participants  to  think  more  explicitly  about  their  role  in  the 
to 
conversation.  While  subtle 
increase 
rapport  or  alignment  are  common  during 
predominantly verbal conversations, the feedback provided 
by  the  lights  highlighted  the  fact  that  a  participant  was 
getting 
their 
conversation  partner,  to  which  they  were  not  accustomed. 
One participant explained,  

information  about  both 

themselves  and 

"When  both  of  us  talk  and  like  the  colors  suddenly 
change, it also affects me because I start thinking about 
why it's changing: is it because of me, or is it because of 
my  partner,  what  is  he  thinking,  what  am  I  thinking?  I 
also think the color affects me a lot."   

Another  student  articulated  the  way  in  which  the  lights 
made  him  aware  of  the  fact  that  he  and  his  partner  were 
actually at odds with each other:  

"Or,  I  guess  with  the  changing  intensity  thing...I  don't 
know,  I  felt  like  that  was  harder  to—  'cause  it  was 
somebody  else  too,  so  it  was  harder  to  gauge  what 
was...affecting  the  lights,  you  know  what  I  mean?  I 
didn't  know  if—'cause  it  was  dim  for  a  lot  of  it,  which 
means  that  [maybe]  he  was  more  stressed  and  I  was 
going the other way trying to relax." 

These  findings  are  closely  related  to  statements  from  the 
therapists  in  our  focus  group  who  expressed  an  interest  in 
visually  and  externally  representing  the  effects  of  self-
awareness in group settings. In the MoodLight system, the 
automatic  nature  of  data  collection  and  representation 
removes  the  locus  of  choice  from  the  user  and  places  it  in 
the  system,  while  the  representation  of  self  offered  by  that 
system  still  performs  some  of  the  social  functions  of 
traditional  self-disclosure.  Statements  from  participants 
reflect  tensions  between  the  inadvertent  act  of  self-
revelation  and  automated  disclosure  practices  when  bio-
sensing  devices  are  used  for  self-awareness  in  social 
contexts.  

LIMITATIONS 
As  mentioned  above,  there  are  limitations  to  the  current 
system  related  to  1)  the  system-wide  representation  of  the 
arousal  matrix,  2)  individual  differences  in  associations 
between  colors  and  affective  states,  and  3)  the  ability  of 
EDA  technology  to  measure  nuances  in  an  individual’s 
experience  of  arousal.  However,  observing  participants 
engage  with  MoodLight  during  this  design  probe  study 
provided  the  opportunity  to  engage  with  these  limitations, 
as  discussed  in  the  next  section.  Now  we  move  on  to 
implications  of  this  work  for  the  display  of  personal 
information through low-level biometric data. 

DISCUSSION 
One  of 
the  most  promising  aspects  of  bio-sensing 
technology lies in the potential for these devices to help us 
see  ourselves  more  clearly  and  more  completely.  This  was 
at  the  heart  of  our  interest  in  developing  the  MoodLight 
system  to  assist  therapists  in  their  work  introducing  stress 
management  techniques  to  college  students.  However,  the 
representation of self that is offered through biosensors and 
other affective systems can be problematic: “A central issue 
faced by affective computing systems is how to balance the 
personal, subjective nature of experienced human emotions 
with  the  external,  objective  representations  of  emotions 
which computers require to function” [19, p. 425]. 

Further  complicating  this  issue  is  the  likelihood  that,  as 
low-level biometric sensors become more deeply embedded 
in  our  environments,  the  resulting  data  will  find  its  way 
more  quickly  into  social  media  channels  and  ubiquitous 
displays.  This  convergence  of  personal  information  and 
increasingly  public  display  will  require  a  more  refined 
understanding of the dynamics of technology-mediated self-
revelation  and  an  appreciation  of  the  risks  of  minimally 
controlled automated disclosure [21; 32].  

Mood and EmotionCSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada150revelation  and 

technology-mediated 

Dialectics  of 
disclosure  
Psychologists refer to the process of deciding what personal 
information  to  share  with  whom  as  the  dialectics  of  self-
disclosure  [28].  Making  a  conscious  decision  to  reveal 
information  about  oneself  can  be  an  important  part  of 
building  lasting  relationships.  However,  not  all  forms  of 
disclosure are beneficial or healthy. Sharing personal details 
too soon in a relationship or sharing information that is too 
private  can  be 
inappropriate,  especially  when  not 
reciprocated.  Our  study  revealed  tensions  between  these 
dialectics and the passive revelation offered by “always-on” 
activity  trackers  and  biometric  sensors.  The  process  of 
intentionally  deciding  what  to  reveal  and  to  whom  is 
disrupted  because  the  system  has  the  ability  to  display 
personal  information  that  users  might  not  be  aware  of 
themselves.  

By  using  a  very  simple  game-like  paradigm  for  the  design 
probe,  we  were  able  to  highlight  basic  social  practices  of 
coordination  and  alignment  that  we  typically  perform 
throughout  our  daily  interactions,  often  unconsciously. 
Some  users  of  MoodLight  approached 
the  passive 
revelation offered by the system as an opportunity for self-
reflection  and  self-discovery.  In  the  context  of  paired 
interactions, the momentary display of arousal level through 
the  colored  lights  provided  real  time  feedback  about  the 
current  state  of  their  social  interaction,  enabling  users  to 
adjust themselves to try to optimize their shared experience. 
The  aggregated  nature  of  the  display  also  provided  an 
opportunity  for  participants 
their  own 
complicity  in  co-constructing  the  overall  tone  of  their 
conversation. From a therapeutic perspective, the process of 
untangling  who  contributes  what  to  an  exchange  is  an 
important  step  to  exploring  a  range  of  interpersonal 
dynamics. 

to  reflect  on 

to 

the 

from 

separate 

intellectual 

Höök  et  al.  talk  about  this  in  terms  of  affective  loop 
experiences,  described  as  “experiences  where  it  is  not 
possible 
sensual 
experiences,  nor  to  single  out  what  is  [an]  individual 
experience from the overall experience arising in a dialogue 
with a friend or in dialogue with a system” [16, p. 248]. In 
observing  participants  interacting  with  each  other  through 
the  MoodLight  system,  we  saw  these  affective  loop 
experiences 
complex  when 
participants were involved in dialogue with a friend and in 
dialogue  with  the  system.  The  simplicity  of  our  system 
enabled  us  to  begin  to  grapple  with  the  ways  that  the 
representation  of  biosensor  data  played  a  role  in  these 
dynamics. 

increasingly 

become 

The use of ambient colored light also allowed us to observe 
the ways in which the form and format of the representation 
of personal information could serve as both description and 
inadvertent  intervention.  Negative  feedback  loops  occurred 
when  some  participants  experienced  high  levels  of  arousal 
that  triggered  the  lights  to  transition  to  the  red  end  of  the 

spectrum.  Immersive  exposure  to  the  red  light  heightened 
arousal  further,  making  it  very  difficult  for  these  users  to 
break  out  of  what  they  perceived  as  an  undesirable  cycle. 
Although Höök et al. talk about loop experiences as being a 
constructive  feature  of  affective  systems,  our  study 
highlights  the  potential  of  interactional  loops  to  be  a 
negative experience for users.  

Agency, skepticism and uncertainty 
Although  students  had  varying  opinions  about  the  hue 
associated  with  their  level  of  arousal,  surprisingly  no  one 
questioned  the  authority  of  the  system  itself.  There  was  a 
marked  lack  of  skepticism  about  the  omniscience  of  the 
system.  This  may  be  due,  at  least  in  part,  to  working  with 
students in a research lab setting, lending the experience an 
overall  sense  of  credibility.  However,  this  observation  did 
prompt  us  to  review  interviews  and  video  recordings  of 
interactions  with  the  system  with  a  particular  eye  to 
understanding  the  ways  in  which  the  students  assumed  the 
system worked. 

In  many  ways,  the  design  of  the  MoodLight  system  aligns 
with  principles  of  empowerment  through  affective  tools 
advocated  by  Höök  et  al.  [16],  Leahu  et  al.  [19],  and 
Boehner et al. [2]. From this perspective, affective systems 
have 
the  potential  “to  embody  a  different  kind  of 
interaction,  one  that  positions  the  user  as  an  expert  who 
makes sense of his or her emotional states with the help of 
the system, in contrast to a more rigid interaction between a 
passive user and an expert system” [19, p. 433].  

In  spite  of  the  relatively  open-ended  ambient  display,  the 
interactive  nature  of  the  system,  and  the  co-constructed 
aggregated  signals  in  the  paired  interactions,  we  did  not 
reach  a  state  of  pervasive  interpretive  and  interactive 
empowered across all of our participants.  In fact, many of 
the students in our design probe abdicated the role of self-
awareness  to  the  system,  seeming  to  expect  (and  trust)  the 
lights  to  tell  them  how  they  were  feeling.  There  was  a 
tendency  to  give  more  credit  to  the  system  than  to 
themselves  in  terms  of  knowing  how  they  were  feeling  in 
the  moment.  This  was  true  even  in  cases  when  subjective 
feelings  contradicted  the  information  displayed  via  the 
lights. 

These  issues  raise  questions  about  the  ways  in  which  we 
present  low-level  biometric  feedback  to  participants  and 
responsibly  explain  the  uncertainty  and  complexity  that 
underlies  much  of  this  information.  When  working  with 
biometric  data,  readings  need  to  be  made  consistently  and 
analysis  depends  on  identifying  patterns  in  the  data.  It  is 
rarely a case of definitive black and white declaration, and 
more  typically  an  instance  of  identifying  a  trend  in  a 
particular direction. This is due as much to the nature of the 
signals  themselves  as  to  the  specifics  of  the  sensing 
technology.  

While  it  is  relatively  easy  to  spot  check  the  accuracy  of 
some types of activity monitors, such as step trackers, it is 

Mood and EmotionCSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada151not  as  easy  for  users  to  check  the  reliability  of  biometric 
sensors  such  as  EDA.  Arousal  is  a  complex  physical  and 
psychological  phenomenon  that  some  users  in  our  study 
tended  to  reduce  to  a  binary  stress-relaxation  axis.  Future 
iterations  of  the  MoodLight  system  will  seek  to  represent 
emotion  as  a  balance  of  subjective  and  objective 
interpretation  [19]  co-constructed  through  interaction  with 
the  system  and  the  revelations  provided  by  it  [2],  taking 
into  consideration  the  social  influences  on  this  process 
identified through this design probe.  

DESIGN IMPLICATIONS 

Ephemerality of Ambient Light 
The use of ambient light is a particularly promising medium 
to  cultivate  healthy  self-awareness  in  social  contexts, 
including  both  therapeutic  and  home  settings.  Feedback  in 
the  form  of  ambient  light  places  minimal  constraints  on 
users: they can maintain a conversation, remain facing each 
other  and  sustain  eye  contact  –  all  common  features  of 
therapeutic  work.  In  particular,  the  use  of  ambient  light 
supported a rich variety of physical positioning, in ways not 
possible  via  screen-based  displays.  Pairs  were  able  to 
remain connected even with their eyes almost shut or when 
facing  away  from  each  other.  Additionally,  there  are 
distinguishing  qualities  to  light  that  are  particularly  suited 
to supporting mindfulness practice.  Ambient light provides 
momentary  feedback  with  an  emphasis  on  the  present 
moment.  Unlike  a  graph,  the  past  is  invisible,  thereby 
placing  a  focus  on  the  present,  a  key  aspect  of  therapeutic 
mindful,  meditative  and  reflective  practices.  Lastly,  this 
technology  can  be  embedded  in  everyday  environments 
(e.g.,  a  therapeutic  clinic,  a  living  room,  a  bedroom)  and 
serve multiple purposes, enabling individuals to easily pick 
up  the  system  for  brief  periods  of  use  without  any  prior 
setup, and then to easily return to prior activities. 

technology-mediated 

Understanding the signals 
Mindfulness  involves  being  aware  of  a  broad  range  of 
mental components and associations that make up everyday 
perception and experience [4]. Effective design of affective 
systems  that  rely  on  biosensor  data  means  ensuring  that 
users  have  the  information  and  freedom  they  need  to 
interpret 
of 
themselves.  It  also  means  enabling  users  to  negotiate 
inadvertent  self-revelation  and  the  risks  of  automated 
disclosure. Based on the findings of this design probe study 
we  believe  MoodLight  will  be  most  effective  when  used 
alongside  or  after  a  period  of  training  during  traditional 
face-to-face  therapeutic  sessions.  The  system  is  currently 
being  piloted  by  clinicians  in  this  context  as  a  tool  for 
introducing self-awareness practices to their patients.  

representations 

Individual Control 
To  account  for  individual  and  cultural  differences  and 
variance,  monitoring/feedback  systems  should  allow  users 
to  choose  the  display  parameters  that  are  meaningful  to 
them.  For MoodLight, this entails allowing users to choose 

the  hues  that  are  meaningful  to  them.  Choosing  the  colors 
that represent arousal states acts essentially as a private key 
that  only  the  individual  knows,  preventing  others  from 
interpreting  the  meaning  behind  the  signal.  Enabling  color 
choice  is  not  just  about  supporting  personal  preference. 
Perhaps more importantly, it returns a measure of control to 
the  individual  over  self-revelation  that  was  taken  away  by 
the  mediation  of  technology.  Although  it  is  possible  with 
most  personal  informatics  to  turn  sensors  off  or  opt  out  of 
sharing  data,  for  biofeedback  systems  measuring  and 
representing  underlying  physiological  factors  in  real-time, 
this  output  is  less  controllable  by  users.  As  reflected  by 
Höök  et  al.’s  work  on  interactional  empowerment  [16], 
giving  individuals  the  ability  to  be  involved  in  the 
representation  of  this  information  ensures  the  locus  of 
control remains with them.  

CONCLUSION 
The passive nature of data capture and the ambient display 
of personal information provided a compelling opportunity 
for  observing  the  mechanics  of  technology-mediated  self-
awareness  and  the  negotiation  of  automated  disclosure  in 
face-to-face  social  engagement.  Data  are  only  meaningful 
and useful when the user has the ability to understand what 
is being represented about him or herself. Our design probe 
showed  that  the  display  of  momentary  arousal  levels  via 
ambient  light  supports  self-discovery,  enabling  students  to 
develop  awareness  of  communication  practices  related  to 
self-revelation.  The  study  also  revealed  tensions  between 
control  over  presentation  of  self  and  passive  sensing 
devices  that  will  be  increasingly  important  to  address  in 
personal  informatics  displays  designed  to  be  embedded  in 
daily work and living environments.  

REFERENCES 
[1]  Bishop, S.R., Lau, M., Shapiro, S., Carlson, L., 

Anderson, N.D., Carmody, J., Segal, Z.V., Abbey, S., 
Speca, M., and Velting, D., 2004. Mindfulness: A 
proposed operational definition. Clinical Psych: Sci 
and Prac, 11, 3, 230-241. 

[2]  Boehner, K., Depaula, R., Dourish, P., and Sengers, 

P., 2007. How emotion is made and measured. IJHCS, 
65, 4, 275-291. 

[3]  Butterfield, J., 1996. The art of light and space. 

Abbeville. 

[4]  Carmody, J., 2009. Evolving conceptions of 
mindfulness in clinical settings. J Cogn 
Psychotherapy, 23, 3, 270-280. 

[5]  Carroll, E.A., Czerwinski, M., Roseway, A., Kapoor, 
A., Johns, P., Rowan, K., and Schraefel, M.C., 2013. 
Food and Mood: Just-in-Time Support for Emotional 
Eating. Humaine Assoc ConfAffective Computing and 
Intelligent Interaction. 

[6]  Church, K., Hoggan, E., and Oliver, N., 2010. A study 
of mobile mood awareness and communication 
through MobiMood. Proc NordiCHI, 128-137. 

Mood and EmotionCSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada152[7]  Clark, H.H., 1996. Using Language. Cambridge 

[23]  Malaney, G.D., 2004. Student use of the internet. J 

University Press, NY. 

[8]  Cohen, S., Kessler, R.C., and Gordon, L.U., 1995. 
Measuring Stress: A Guide for Health and Social 
Scientists. Oxford Unive Press, Oxford, UK. 
[9]  Darling, C.A., Mcwey, L.M., Howard, S.N., and 
Olmstead, S.B., 2007. College student stress: the 
influence of interpersonal relationships on sense of 
coherence. Stress and health 23, 4, 215-229. 

Educ Tech Sys 33, 1, 53-66. 

[24]  Manusov, V. and Patterson, M.L., 2006. The Sage 
Handbook of Nonverbal Communication. Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA. 

[25]  Matsumoto, M. and Smith, J.C., 2001. Progressive 

muscle relaxation, breathing exercises, and ABC 
relaxation theory. J Clinical Psych, 57, 12, 1551-
1557. 

[10]  Ferreira, P., Sanches, P., Höök, K., and Jaensson, T., 

[26]  Mcduff, D., Karlson, A., Kapoor, A., Roseway, A., 

2008. License to chill!: how to empower users to cope 
with stress. Proc NordiCHI, 123-132. 
[11]  Frank, K.A., 1997. The role of the analyst's 

inadvertent self‐revelations. Psychoanalytic Dialogues 
7, 3, 281-314. 

[12]  Greene, K., Derlega, V.J., and Mathews, A., 2006. 

Self-disclosure in personal relationships. In The 
Cambridge Hdbk of Personal Relationships, 409-427. 
[13]  Grossman, P., Niemann, L., Schmidt, S., and Walach, 
H., 2004. Mindfulness-based stress reduction and 
health benefits: A meta-analysis. J Psychosomatic 
Res, 57, 1, 35-43. 

[14]  Gumperz, J.J., 1982. Discourse Strategies. Cambridge 

Univ Press, Cambridge, UK. 

[15]  Harrigan, J.A., 2005. Proxemics, Kinesics and Gaze. 
In The New Handbook of Methods in Nonverbal 
Behavior Research, J.A. Harrigan, R. Rosenthal and 
K.R. Scherer Eds. Oxford Univ Press, NY, 137-198. 
[16]  Höök, K., Ståhl, A., Sundström, P., and Laaksolaahti, 
J., 2008. Interactional Empowerment. Proc SIGCHI, 
647-656. 

[17]  Joinson, A.N., 2001. Self‐disclosure in computer‐

mediated communication: The role of self‐awareness 
and visual anonymity. Euro J Soc Psych, 31, 2, 177-
192. 

[18]  Knez, I., 2001. Effects of colour of light on nonvisual 

psychological processes. J Envir Psych, 21, 2, 201-
208. 

[19]  Leahu, L., Schwenk, S., and Sengers, P., 2008. 

Subjective objectivity: negotiating emotional 
meaning. Proc DIS, 425-434. 

[20]  Lederer, S., Mankoff, J., and Dey, A.K., 2003. Who 
wants to know what when? privacy preference 
determinants in ubiquitous computing. Proc SIGCHI, 
724-725. 

[21]  Lederer, S., Mankoff, J., Dey, A.K., and Beckmann, 
C., 2003. Managing personal information disclosure 
in ubiquitous computing environments. Report No. 
UCB/CSD-3-1257. Computer Science Division 
(EECS), Univ. of California Berkeley. 

[22]  Levenson, E.A., 1996. Aspects of self-revelation and 

self-disclosure. Contemp Psychoanalysis 32, 2, 237-
248. 

and Czerwinski, M., 2012. AffectAura: an intelligent 
system for emotional memory. Proc SIGCHI, 849-
858. 

[27]  Moodjam.Org, Verified 9/23/2010.   
[28]  Petronio, S. and Bantz, C., 1991. Controlling the 
ramifications of disclosure:" Don't tell anybody 
but…". J Lang and Soc Psych. 10, 263. 

[29]  http://developers.meethue.com/coreconcepts.html. 
[30]  Powers, M.B., Zum Vörde Sive Vörding, M.B., and 
Emmelkamp, P.M.G., 2009. Acceptance and 
commitment therapy: A meta-analytic review. 
Psychotherapy and psychosomatics 78, 2, 73-80. 
[31]  Sanches, P., Höök, K., Vaara, E., Weymann, C., 

Bylund, M., Ferreira, P., Peira, N., and Sjölinder, M., 
2010. Mind the body!: designing a mobile stress 
management application encouraging personal 
reflection. Proc DIS, 47-56. 

[32]  Sapuppo, A. and Seet, B.C., 2012. An Empirical 

Investigation of Disclosure of Personal Information in 
Ubiquitous Social Computing. Intl J Computer Theory 
& Eng, 4, 3. 

[33]  Schwartz, M.S. and Andrasik, F.E., 2003. 

Biofeedback: A practitioner's guide. Guilford Press. 
[34]  Smith, A., Rainie, L., and Zickuhr, K., 2011. College 

students and technology. Pew Internet & American 
Life Project 19. 

[35]  Suler, J., 2004. The online disinhibition effect. 
Cyberpsychology & Behav, 7, 3, 321-326. 

[36]  Vaara, E., Silvăşan, I., Ståhl, A., and Höök, K., 2010. 
Temporal Relations in Affective Health. Proc 
NordiCHI, 833-838. 

[37]  Walters, J., Apter, M.J., and Svebak, S., 1982. Color 
preference, arousal, and the theory of psychological 
reversals. Motivation and Emotion 6, 3, 193-215. 

[38]  Waltz, E., 2012. How i quantified myself. IEEE 

Spectrum 49, 9, 42-47. 

[39]  Wardhaugh, R., 1985. How Conversation Works. 

Blackwell, NY. 

[40]  Ware, C., 2012. Information Visualization: Perception 

for Design. Elsevier. 

Mood and EmotionCSCW 2015, March 14-18, 2015, Vancouver, BC, Canada153 
