No Forests without Trees: Particulars and Patterns in 
Visualizing Personal Communication 
Tiffany Ng 
Cornell University 
 Information Science 
301 College Ave., Ithaca NY 14850 
1-607-379-9219 
tyn2@cornell.edu 

Dan Cosley 
Cornell University 
Information Science 
301 College Ave., Ithaca NY 14850 
1-607-379-9219 
drc44@cornell.edu 

Ou Jie Zhao 
Cornell University  
Information Science 
301 College Ave., Ithaca NY 14850 
1-607-379-9219  
oz23@cornell.edu 

ABSTRACT 
When  people  use  visualizations  of  conversational  archives,  they 
typically  reflect  on  particular  events,  rather  than  patterns  of 
activity  over  time.  We  explore  whether  this  is  a  fundamental 
aspect  of  how  people  use  data  to  reflect  on  the  past  through 
pieTime, a visualization we developed that focuses on presenting 
aggregated behavioral data at timescales from hours to months. It 
builds  on  work  in  conversation  visualization  and  lifelogging  by 
focusing  on  rhythms  rather  than  details,  supporting  reflection 
across media, and using phone logs to complement CMC media. 
A  15-person  evaluation  supports  findings  from  prior  work  about 
the  importance  of  particular  details  and  storytelling  in  tools  that 
support reflection, even when the design goals emphasize higher-
level  patterns.  Still,  aggregate  patterns  provide  additional  insight 
into personal behavior, suggesting that systems that integrate both 
particulars  and  patterns  may  be  especially  valuable,  especially 
when they also help people build and manage their identities. 

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
[User/Machine  Systems]:  Human 
H.1.2 
information processing; H.5.m [Miscellaneous] 

factors—human 

General Terms 
Design, Human Factors 

Keywords 
visualization; reflection; temporal rhythms; lifelogging 

[14]  give  glimpses  into  the  regular  heartbeat  of  community 
activity  and  evolution  of  these  communities  over  time.  For 
individuals,  tools  such  as  Themail  [38]  allow  people  to  see  both 
details of their email interactions and how they evolve over time, 
while Snoopy [31] helps people see regular patterns, or “habits”, 
in their spending data. 

In  general,  when  researchers  develop  tools  for  this  sort  of 
analysis, they focus on temporal patterns and regularities at large 
scale,  as  in  [14][18].  Individuals,  on  the  other  hand,  tend  to 
browse to specific times or events and reminisce about them when 
given  tools  for  visualizing  personal  archives  of  conversation, 
rather than look at patterns [37][38] Our goal in this paper was to 
explore whether this focus on details was influenced by the design 
of these interfaces, or whether it is a more fundamental property 
of  the  way  people  use  data  to  reflect  on  their  pasts.  Sociologists 
recognize 
in  social  matters  and 
relationships [35], and our hypothesis was that focusing people’s 
attention on temporal rhythms of communication would help them 
learn more about themselves. 

time  as  a  major  factor 

To  this  end,  we  developed  pieTime  (Fig.  1),  a  visualization  that 

1.  INTRODUCTION 
Visualizations  and  analyses  of  behavior  in  social  media  and 
computer-mediated  communication  tools  such  as  email  aim  to 
help  both  researchers  and  users  move  from  raw  records  of 
recorded 
communities, 
relationships, and lives. Harvesting the activities and information 
people  already  generate  through  sources  as  diverse  as  Facebook 
use [14], financial transactions [31], and editing in Wikipedia [39] 
has  proven  to  be  useful  for  generating  insight  about  both 
communities and individuals. Analyses of IRC [18] and Facebook 

insights 

activity 

about 

their 

to 

Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 

iConference 2012, February 7-10, 2012, Toronto, Ontario, Canada 
Copyright © 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-0782-6/12/02. 

Figure 1. pieTime visualization comparing email and 
phone activity by hours of the day. 

25 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
helps people compare their behavior across communication media 
at  scales  from  hours  of  the  day  to  months  of  the  year.  It  also 
chooses characteristic keywords associated with each time period 
and  medium  to  help  ground  the  data,  but  our  hope  was  that  by 
focusing  on  the  aggregations  rather  than  the  details,  pieTime 
would  focus  people’s  attention  on  rhythmic  patterns  of  activity. 
An  evaluation  of  pieTime  with  15  people  shows  that  these 
rhythms have some value, and that people noticed both expected 
and  surprising  patterns.  Many  people,  however,  still  preferred  to 
focus  on  specific  activities  and  incidents  even  though  pieTime 
presents few details, suggesting that events and storytelling are a 
fundamental  way  that  people  think  about  the  past.  Indeed, 
pieTime  was  most  successful  when  people  believed  that  the 
patterns and keywords reflected their identity, a finding of general 
interest  for  visualizations  of  social  media.  Finally,  although  on 
balance people found the interface engaging, they expressed little 
desire  for  ongoing  use  of  pieTime,  which  raises  the  question  of 
how these systems might encourage ongoing use and reflection. 

2.  RELATED WORK 
pieTime  sits  at  the  intersection  of  three  main  streams  of  work: 
reflective  technologies,  visualizations  of  communication  activity, 
and temporal rhythms in computer-mediated communication. We 
discuss each in turn. 

Reflective Technologies. Technology designed for reflecting and 
self-informing  is  an  emerging  area  within  HCI.  Hallnäs  and 
Redström  argue  for  designs  that  use  technology  to  encourage 
reflection  rather  than  efficiency  [16],  a  theme  echoed  by  both 
designers  and  users  of  such  technologies  [33].  Lifelogging  and 
reminiscing are two emerging application areas for reflection. 

Studies have recognized the value of noticing patterns in behavior 
for  fostering  self-awareness,  self-control,  and  self-organization 
[2][27]. Lifelogging, or capturing, analyzing, and visualizing daily 
behavior [19], is one strategy for finding these patterns. Assogba 
and  Donath  showed  that  habitual  behavior  can  be  used  for  self-
expression  and  introspection  through  their  blogging  website, 
Mycrocosm  [1],  which  lets  users  share  graphs  of  their  personal 
statistics  with  others  (e.g.  how  many  people  irritated  me  today). 
Users enjoyed the novel form of graphical communication and felt 
connected to their data, which gave them a personalized depiction 
of the “eccentricities of life” they experienced. 

In  contrast  to  the  aggregation  and  pattern-mining  that  often 
characterizes  lifelogging,  reminiscing  is  about  reflecting  on 
specific  past  experiences,  both  as  a  therapeutic  psychological 
activity  [41]  and  a  way  to  foster  relationships  and  understand 
oneself  [40]  Building  on  theories  of  episodic  memory  [6]  and 
empirical studies of family reminiscing [26], a number of systems 
attempt to support this activity. For example, Pensieve motivates 
everyday  reminiscence  by  emailing  “memory  triggers”—Flickr 
photos,  tweets  and  blog  posts  from  your  past,  and  non-
personalized  text  prompts  [23]—to  your  inbox.  SenseCam  [32] 
uses a small camera worn around a user’s neck to take hundreds 
of photos throughout the day that create a “visual journal” that can 
be used to reflect on one’s behavior [20]. 

The availability of personal data is a key issue. Li points out the 
value  of  using  data  that  is  automatically  collected,  as  it  is  easily 
obtainable and pre-existing, requiring minimal effort from users to 
reflect on the collected information [19]. For example, Mint.com 
to  facilitate  personal 
[21] 
budgeting;  these  data  can  then  be  used  to  visualize  everyday 
habits in activity and travel, as well as the environmental impact 
of those habits [31]. 

leverages  financial 

transactions 

Communication  Visualization.  Early  visualizations  of  email 
focused  on  tools  for  managing  mail  flows  (e.g.,  helping  people 
organize  and  visualize  conversation  threads  [29]).  Recent  work, 
however,  has  focused  on  supporting  reflection  on  email  activity 
and  relationships.  Themail  showed  columns  of  keywords 
associated  with  a  contact  along  a  timeline  that  might  help  users 
see  the  evolution  of  a  relationship,  although  in  practice  people 
often used it to recall specific events [38]. PostHistory’s calendar-
based  interface  for  correspondence  logs  was  also  useful  in 
identifying meaningful dates and events in the past, and its display 
of  social  networks  among  contacts  prompted  users  to  align  the 
evolution  of  these  relationships  with  their  email  archive  [37]. 
Zooming out further, Perer et al. analyzed a 15-year email archive 
to study the evolution of long-term social relationships [25]. 

Visualizing group discussions is also a related, well-explored area, 
especially  in  the  context  of  workgroups  [3][8]  and  online 
communities  [9].  Some  of  these  visualizations  are  similar  to 
pieTime in that they concentrate on revealing patterns (e.g., using 
concentric  rings  [4],  spirals  [5]  and  stacked  timelines  [10]. 
However,  pieTime’s 
the  evolution  of 
conversations,  relationships,  or  workgroups,  but  the  aggregation 
of communication patterns for individual, personal reflection. By 
giving  people  not  only  long-term  views  by  month  and  year,  but 
also views that divide activity down to the hour and by focusing 
on patterns across all of one’s contacts rather than individuals, we 
hope to help people see their life rhythms reflected at many scales. 

is  not  on 

focus 

Temporal  Rhythms.  These  rhythms,  and  time  more  generally, 
are  a  major  factor  in  social  matters  and  relationships  [35]. 
Researchers have explored these patterns at the community level, 
such  as  Jones  et  al.’s  analysis  of  temporal  patterns  in  IRC, 
including  session  durations  and  hourly  message  densities  [18], 
and  Golder  et  al.’s  discovery  of  regular  patterns  across  days  and 
weeks  in  Facebook  activity  [14].  Temporal  rhythms  can  also  be 
used  in  concert  with  social  network  data,  as  with  Fisher  and 
Dourish’s visualizing of past interactions among email contacts to 
infer social roles and relationships [12] and Eagle and Pentland’s 
use of mobile phones as “wearable sensors” [11]. 

These  technologies  use  a  number  of  media  beyond  email  to 
provide  insight  into  behavior:  IRC  [18],  Facebook  [14],  mobile 
phone  use  [11],  email  [12][25][29][37][38],  instant  messaging 
[35],  spending  data  [31],  blog  entries  [1],  and  so  on.  In  general, 
these systems focus on one medium at a time. 

3.  SYSTEM DESIGN 
pieTime’s  goal  is  to  help  people  reflect  on  patterns  in  their 
behavior  in  ways  that  complement  existing  approaches  to 
visualization and reflection described above. As pieTime and our 
understanding  of  the  design  space  evolved,  we  arrived  at  three 
main design goals that build on prior work: 

Focus  on  aggregate  patterns,  not  specific  details.  Most 
evaluations of the tools described above suggest that people focus 
on  specific  events  in  the  past.  Although  reminiscence  is  useful, 
our goal was to explicitly focus attention on patterns to see what 
they  might  provide.  Thus,  we  minimize  the  presentation  of 
specific  details  that  are  known  to  support  reminiscing  to  focus 
people’s attention on higher-level patterns—explicitly contrary to 
the  “details  on  demand”  portion  of  Shneiderman’s  visual 
information seeking mantra [34]. 

Help  people  reflect  on  patterns  at  varying  levels  of  granularity. 
This brings the work on community rhythms in IRC and Facebook 

26 

 
while  our  second  represented  activity  with  lengths  of  line 
segments, making it easier to compare activity levels at different 
time slices with the naked eye (Figure 2). 

However, users found color intensities to be hard to compare and 
line segments hard to interact with (e.g., by hovering over with a 
mouse  to  see  more  details  about  the  time  period).  The  current 
version provides both an easy way to compare time periods while 
preserving the idea of “pieces of a whole” through time slices of 
varying  radii  (Figure  3).  The  radii  are  scaled  so  that  the  piece 
representing  maximum  activity  for  that  timescale  extends  to  the 
edge of the invisible circle that encloses the pie. Segment lengths 
in  version  2  were  computed  the  same  way,  but  started  from  the 
edge of the pie rather than the center. Each pie slice consumes 1/n 
of  the  circumference,  where  n  is  the  number  of  time  divisions. 
Although these choices create a visual illusion that make periods 
with higher levels of activity look disproportionately larger in area 
than  pieces  displaying  less  activity,  we  hoped  that  increased 
usability and more aesthetic visuals would outweigh the need for 
precision in comparing exact levels of activity. 

3.2  Timescales 
Our  initial  thought  was  that  since  daily  rhythms  are  some  of  the 
most basic ones we experience, we should focus on time divisions 
that  give  people  insight  into  the  structure  of  their  day.  Thus,  the 
first  prototype  showed  activity  aggregated  by  either  hour  or  half 
hour, with the pie divided into 24 or 48 pieces. This led to some 
expected  regularities,  such  as  mealtimes  and  sleep  patterns—and 
this may not be bad. In recommender systems, suggesting movies 
that  people  already  know  they  like  can  help  to  build  trust  in  the 
system [36]. As we will see, people need cues to help them trust 
visualizations of conversation as well. 

People  reacting  to  the  first  prototype  thought  they  would  like  to 
see  patterns  in  changes  in  activity  at  larger  timescales.  Some 
expected  that  they  were  likely  to  exhibit  the  same  behavior,  for 
instance, after going to the gym on certain days of each week. In 
the  final  version  of  pieTime,  we  took  this  suggestion,  as  well  as 
following  prior  work  that  divides  time  into  months  and  years. 
Thus, pieTime allows users to segment the pie into 24, 31, 7, and 
12 pieces representing hours of the day, days of the month, days 
of  the  week,  and  months  of  the  year  respectively  (Figure  3). 
Hourly is the default (the half-hour timescale was removed since 
it provided little to no additional information over this). We hoped 
that  these  scales  might  each  reveal,  and  prompt  reflection  on, 
regular  events:  daily  coffee,  weekly  meetings,  monthly  club 
activities,  or  the  way  that  fiscal  years  or  seasonal  weather  all 

Figure 2. Early prototypes showing hourly activity levels. At 
left, version 1 shows phone activity indicated by color 
intensity. At right, version 2 shows email activity indicated by 
line length and keywords associated with the time interval. 

down to the individual scale. Our hope is to help people see both 
familiar and unexpected patterns at a variety of timescales. 

Support  comparisons  across  media.  People  choose  different 
media  for  different  goals  [13],  and  we  hoped  that  comparing 
patterns  across  media  might  lead  to  insights.  Multi-medium 
visualizations  such  as  Intel’s  Museum  of  Me  [22]  also  engage 
users. 

Below, we discuss how the major components of the design—the 
pie,  the  choice  of  data  source,  and  the  inclusion  of  keywords—
evolved.  Our  choices  and  changes  were  driven  by  feedback  on 
early iterations as well as by our own reactions and design goals. 

3.1  The Pie 
Timelines  are  a  common  way  to  visualize  temporal  data  [10]. 
Spirals are another way to simultaneously display both serial and 
periodic data [5]. However, we were inspired by more traditional 
representations  of  time,  such  as  the  analog  clock,  that  suggest 
repeated, cyclical patterns. These circular forms are familiar, and 
we used the clock metaphor as a starting point for developing the 
pie.  The  goal  of  the  pie  was  to  emphasize  sections  as  parts  of  a 
whole—recurring periods, or meaningful “slices” of one’s life. 

pieTime  aggregates  the  amount  of  activity  in  each  time  slice  by 
counting  the  number  of  timestamps  corresponding  to  each 
incoming and outgoing communication. Our first prototype was a 
near-literal  clock  representation  that  associated  color  intensity 
with the amount of e-mail activity aggregated by hour of the day, 

Figure 3. Final version of pieTime showing aggregated email activity at different timescales. 

27 

 
shape  people’s  communications  and  lives.  For  example,  in  the 
phone  data  shown  in  Figure  2,  pieTime  showed  an  unexpected 
spike of activity for one of the authors between 11pm and 12am. 
He had been taking late night ice cream trips with a friend and had 
not  realized  how  frequently  they  were  occurring.  pieTime  was 
able  to  pick  up  on  this  behavior  because  it  accumulates  activity 
over time. 

3.3  Data Sources 
pieTime  was  designed  to  help  people  see  patterns  of  activity  in 
communication  media.  To  choose  appropriate  media,  we  first 
brainstormed  potential  sources  of  communication  histories,  then 
narrowed our list based on three main criteria. First, the data had 
to be readily available and quick to download, because we wanted 
to  be  able  to  rapidly  generate  the  visualization.  This  imposed 
constraints,  such  as  using  headers  rather  than  the  content  of 
communication,  that  were  not  so  onerous  given  our  focus  on 
temporal rhythms but might be unsuitable for other goals. Second, 
the  sources  we  chose  had  to  be  widely  used  in  order  to  find 
potential  users.  Third,  the  source  needed  to  be  a  rich  enough 
representation to suggest meaningful insights. 

These criteria ruled out instant messaging, for instance; there are 
no dominant IM clients, and user interviews suggested that many 
people  don’t  store  chat  history.  Blog  posts  are  generally 
infrequent  and  are  more  about  self-expression  than  interpersonal 
communication.  Twitter  has  tight  download  limits.  Facebook 
activity  logs  contain  rich  information,  but  are  hard  to  access 
because  of  its  frequently  changing  API  and  awkward  privacy 
model.  We  even  experimented  with  including  web-browsing 
activity,  but  surveys  suggested  that  people  clean  out  their 
browsing history on a regular basis and many people use multiple 
browsers on different machines, making it hard to gather enough 
data to represent activity patterns. 

In the end, we chose email and mobile phone usage. Email was a 
natural choice given its ubiquity and the amount of prior research 
that  has  used  it,  and  although  our  informants  described  email  as 
primarily a work medium, work is still an integral part of life. Cell 
phone usage is relevant because phone calls coupled with texting 
facilitate  many  everyday  interactions  among  today’s  youth 
[15][30].  Our  system  uses  a  preprocessor  that  downloads  mail 
headers  from  Gmail  and  phone  bills  (including  phone  numbers, 
timestamps of text messages and calls, and locations) from either 
AT&T or Verizon. 

Users of early prototypes expressed a strong interest in being able 
to  compare  their  data  sets.  We  first  tried  presenting  two 
visualizations side-by-side, but users had trouble moving between 
them.  Since  concentric  circles  work  well  for  visual  comparisons 
[28],  we  used  them  to  establish  a  common  time  scale  and  to 
extend  the  “pieces  of  a  whole”  metaphor  by  “stacking”  the  two 
data  sets.  We  also  extended  the  hovering  feature  to  display  the 
detailed  data  for  both  data  sets.  Figure  1  shows  the  stacking  in 
action.  We  did  no  scaling  to  favor  either  email  or  phone  data  as 
some  users  may  communicate  more  through  either  medium. 
Instead,  we  combined  the  raw  number  of  phone  calls  with  the 
number  of  text  messages  into  “texts  or  calls  made.”  We  ignored 
the 
length  of  communication  because  we  were  primarily 
concerned with frequency of communication rather than duration.  

3.4  Keyword extraction 
Although  seeing  spikes  of  activity  in  the  first  prototype  of 
pieTime  triggered  informants  to  recall  or  construct  reasons  why 
these spikes existed, they sometimes had trouble explaining them. 

To  help  people  create  explanations  and  to  create  the  personal 
connections between the user and the visualization recommended 
by  [37],  we  decided  to  extract  representative  keywords  for  each 
time slice. For emails we focused on subject lines; for phone bills 
we used location data about SMS messages and calls, as this was 
the only qualitative data we could retrieve. 

Fisher linear classifiers exploit probabilities of word occurrence to 
categorize email as either spam or legitimate. This seemed like a 
plausible  approach  for  finding  distinctive  keywords,  so  for  each 
time  slice,  timescale,  and  medium,  we  trained  a  Fisher  classifier 
that treated content from that medium and time slice as “ham” and 
everything else as “spam”. We then returned the four words that 
had  the  highest  relative  probability  of  appearing  in  that  medium 
and  time  slice.  For  example,  in  Figure  1,  the  words  nytimes  and 
burlington  are  most  uniquely  identified  with  emails  and  phone 
activity  between  8am  and  9am.  Four  words  is  a  somewhat 
arbitrary choice that happened to fit well in the allotted space. 

4.  EVALUATION 
We  used  the  version  of  pieTime  shown  in  Figures  1  and  3  to 
evaluate how well it accomplished its primary goal of supporting 
reflection  on  patterns  of  activity,  as  well  as  how  our  design 
decisions  to  avoid  detail,  present  data  at  multiple  levels  of 
granularity,  and  support  comparison  across  media  affected  the 
ways people reflected. 

We  recruited  15  college-aged  participants  (3  female,  12  male) 
from  a  large  northeastern  university.  Each  participant  was 
required  to  have  access  to  electronic  AT&T  or  Verizon  phone 
bills  and  a  Gmail  account. The advertisement  for  the  experiment 
made  it  clear  that  none  of  their  data  would  be  kept  and  that  the 
researchers would only see the visualization if the participant gave 
permission.  Participants  were  compensated  with  either  course 
credit or a piece of pie1. 

Each  session  was  conducted  by  a  pair  of  experimenters.  After 
obtaining  consent,  we  told  participants  that  the  goal  was  to 
“evaluate a tool that visualizes people’s communication patterns.” 
They were then asked to enter their Gmail username and password 
so  our  preprocessor  could  prepare  their  email.  This  processing 
took  about  five  minutes,  as  many  participants  had  thousands  of 
emails.  During  this  processing,  we  described  the  experimental 
procedure and helped them download their phone bills. 

We  first  asked  participants  to  “play  around”  with  the  tool  while 
thinking aloud. One experimenter observed while the other used a 
list  of  questions  to  guide  participants  and  help  them  notice 
different  parts  of  the  system.  We  probed  participants  to  describe 
what  they  thought  they  were  seeing,  what  they  were  thinking  as 
they used pieTime, whether any of the data or their interpretations 
of  it  surprised  them,  and  whether  they  felt  any  connection 
between what they saw and what has happened in their life. 

After  participants  finished  exploring  the  interface,  we  asked  a 
series of follow-up questions about their reactions to the system as 
a  whole.  These  include  questions  about  the  usability  of  the 
visualization,  which 
interesting,  useful,  or 
confusing,  prior  experience  with  similar  tools  or  visualizations, 
and so on. Sessions averaged approximately 45 minutes. 

features  were 

To  analyze  the  data,  we  created  affinity  diagrams  based  on  our 
that  shaped 
to  find  major 
observations 

in  order 

themes 

1  Seven  chose  pie,  eight  chose  credit.  Apparently,  hunger  and 

grades are equally important to students. 

28 

 
                                                                  
participants’  experience  and  their  reactions  to  features.  Quotes 
below are attributed with that participant’s id number (e.g., P#). 

5.  RESULTS 
Our data suggested four main themes. First, although our goal was 
to focus attention on patterns, people first looked to the keywords 
to  orient  themselves  and  to  convince  themselves  that  pieTime 
reflected their identity. Second, they looked for anomalies, both in 
the  keywords  and  in  levels  of  activity,  and  then  constructed 
explanations.  Third,  people  detected  and  reflected  on  activity 
patterns pieTime revealed, both expected and unexpected. Fourth, 
although the interface for comparing email and phone activity was 
less  usable  than  we  hoped,  presenting  that  information  did  lead 
people to reflect on their use of those media. 
5.1  Personal connection was crucial 
Despite  our  goal  of  focusing  attention  on  higher-level  patterns, 
people tended to spend much more time analyzing keywords than 
noticing patterns. This may be because in the current design, there 
is more information in the keywords than the frequencies: as one 
user (P2) pointed out, switching from one hour to the next would 
produce  four  new  keywords  (“livermore_ca,  sunnyvale_ca, 
newyork_ny,  camden_nj”,  for  phone  data),  whereas  only  one 
frequency number (“80 texts or calls made”) would be updated. 

The  keywords,  however,  were  often  difficult  for  people  to 
interpret.  The  Fisher  algorithm  selects  the  most  identifying 
keywords for a given time slice, relative to other times, and these 
are often cryptic (as with “671x543” in Figure 2). Many users had 
a  hard  time  connecting  these  keywords  to  their  own  lives, 
especially the “nonsensical [ones] bloated by spam” (P14). A few 
even  wondered  if  we  were  showing  them  someone  else’s  data, 
because their intuition was that the keywords should be the most 
commonly occurring words: 

“I email my mother a lot…I would really expect to see my mom’s 
keywords because that’s really important to me.” (P11) 

“I’m in a frat so I should get a lot of frat emails.” (P1) 

Thus, activity by itself didn’t mean much unless it was associated 
with  recognizable  keywords.  Recognition  led  to  connection,  as 
with this user who was browsing through a view sorted by days of 
the month, then stopped in delight at a promising discovery: 

“Oh, the 27th day of the month shows up with my girlfriend’s last 
name.” (P5) 

Suddenly,  this  data  was  his.  The  keyword  confirmed  his 
connection to the data as he tried to uncover the relation between 
the  date  and  his  previous  correspondences.  These  findings 
resonated  with  similar  notions  of  personalization  found  in 
PostHistory [37] and Themail [38]. Users expected the dataset to 
represent  them  as  individuals,  though  one  said  his  “name 
shouldn’t show up as a keyword” (P12).  
5.2  Sensemaking of the Past, Especially the 
Unusual 
Participants were also quick to detect anomalies in the data. These 
prompted users to search for specific events such as vacations or 
projects  to  explain  bursts  of  activity  or  unusual  keywords.  All 
participants  linked  keywords  and  patterns  in  the  visualization  to 
life  events.  For  instance,  high  volumes  of  calls  and  texts  around 
certain days of a month were attributed to birthdays, holidays, or 
travel periods that required more on-the-go coordination: “During 
the  holidays  I  texted  and  called  a  lot.  I  was  traveling  and 
coordinating with people.” (P7)  

A  handful  of  users  were  especially  intrigued  by  the  keywords, 
scanning  through  each  time  slice’s  set  of  words  and  creating 
stories to explain why the words may have appeared. They were 
able to jump through a series of quick anecdotes while mumbling 
through each keyword: 

“Evina:  some  health  care  thing,  I  forget  what  for…Nxpowerlite: 
something at [a company I worked for] people use to reduce jpeg 
file  sizes  to  make  Powerpoints  smaller…EZ-pass:  at  the  end  of 
November,  my  dad  pays  for  EZ-pass,  cause  I  drove  home  for 
Thanksgiving  and  there’s  a  lot  of  tolls  on  the  way  back  and  he 
wanted to make sure he had enough money in our account.” (P3) 

“Freetoll: that’s from me trying to figure out many minutes I have 
left…[Laughs]  June  keywords:  “burning”  and  “exposed”  all 
have to do with me getting sunburned—I peeled twice.” (P8) 

Somewhat  like  the  nagging  feeling of  being  unable  to  remember 
the  answer  to  a  trivia  question,  participants  were  annoyed  or 
puzzled when they couldn’t explain what they saw: “I don’t think 
I’ve  ever  called  Toronto  at  3pm”  (P5).  One  user  (P2)  kept 
returning  to  a  mysterious  spike  in  emails  and  obscure  words  at 
3am,  until  he  finally  sighed  in  relief,  realizing  it  was  a  daily 
mailing list for dictionary and SAT words. 

In  general,  users  enjoyed  finding  bits  of  their  past  to  discover. 
Whether they were simply impressed that the system was able to 
unearth these fine details, or just interested in getting a glance of 
moments  in  the  past,  everyone  had  a  story  to  tell.  Further,  their 
focus  on  specific  details  and  stories  echoes  findings  from  other 
evaluations  of  visualizations  [37][38],  even  though  our  design 
avoided such details in order to focus attention on patterns. 
5.3  Finding Patterns in Behavior 
However, reactions were mixed about the utility of patterns. Some 
participants  claimed  they  didn’t  learn  anything  that  they  didn’t 
already  know  after  using  the  tool,  but  others  made  observations 
about their lives they hadn’t explicitly considered before: 

“7pm is tiny—this is when I eat. That's interesting. Same thing at 
11:30  and  noon…And  throughout  the  entire  morning.  I'm  not  a 
morning person.” (P7) 

“Apparently  I  text  everybody  in  the  world  at  4pm…Yeah  that 
sounds  about  right.  It's  when  I  get  out  of  work.  It’s  also  right 
before I go to workouts.” (P4) 

People’s  reactions  to  the  timescales  varied.  The  default  hourly 
breakdown  gave  users  a  direct,  “nice  and  well-labeled”  (P15) 
way of looking at their daily patterns, though one described it as 
“too granular” (P11) to reflect anything in his randomly ordered 
schedule.  Most  users  spent  their  time  looking  at  hourly,  weekly, 
and monthly views, though a few spent so much time interpreting 
each  hour  of  the  default  timescale  that  they  had  little  time  to 
explore  the  others.  Users  spent  the  least  time  on  days  of  the 
month, which had few discernable patterns. Viewing by months of 
the year and  days  of  the  week  tended  to  make  the  most  sense  to 
people.  Nine  users  observed  that  months  of  the  year  revealed 
cycles  of  the  academic  year,  noting  distinct  drop-offs  during 
breaks  and  obvious  growth  during  classes  and  important  events 
like interviews and trips. All but one user noticed a significantly 
higher  amount  of  emails  sent  and  received  from  Sunday  through 
Tuesday compared to the rest of the week, and half of them found 
the  discovery  surprising.  After  considering  possible  causes,  most 
users devised a likely explanation: 

“Friday is the day I don’t wanna do any work. Saturday is not as 
busy 
for  Sunday.  Thursday—early 
partying…” (P2)  

’cause  you’re  waiting 

29 

 
Ten participants were able to link patterns in their lives to times, 
using the keywords associated with each time: 

“It  looks  like  6:30  is  a  contact  California  [half]  hour,  whereas 
6pm appears to be New Jersey. It’s just interesting that there’s a 
time of day that seems to be dominated by Californians.” (P7) 

And  although  in  the  post-interviews,  most  participants  claimed 
that  using  a  tool  such  as  pieTime  would  not  change  anything  in 
their lives, seeing the visualizations still prompted some to reflect 
on their habits and lifestyles: 

“The keywords at 4am—guess that tells me I’ve been up too late 
working  on  that  project.  Definitely  the  most  useful  piece  of  info 
I’ve  seen  so  far.  Working  on  a  project  at  4am  in  the  morning  is 
kinda bad.” (P5) 

“Maybe I use email too much during the week.” (P4) 

One  user  extended  his  observations  in  a  pensive  manner, 
reflecting  on  how  a  hiatus  in  email  communication  with  others 
made him feel: 

“I  do  tend  to  notice  that  I  get  a lot  less [e-]mail  in  the  summer. 
[It]  makes  me  sound  pathetic.  I  feel  more  connected  getting 
emails.  I  don’t  get  even  much  personal  correspondence  through 
email, but it’s depressing not to get any email at all even if I just 
delete it.” (P8) 

Communication  is  in  an  integral  part  of  people’s  lives.  People 
have an idea of how much correspondence they feel is too little or 
too  much,  and  providing  a  way  to  explore  these  data  might  help 
people become more aware of time-based patterns. Further, these 
patterns don’t have to be unexpected in order to deliver a message 
that prompts reflection. 
5.4  Comparing Email and Phone 
In  general,  users  found  phone  keywords,  which  were  simply  the 
locations of the other caller, to be more meaningful than keywords 
from the email data set. These locations had a much more limited 
range  than  the  keywords  and  were  often  less  idiosyncratic, 
allowing  users  to  associate  activity  with  specific  friends  and 
family with little ambiguity. 

Many  users  found  stacking  email  and  phone  data  together  to  be 
unintuitive because of multiple issues, including normalization of 
activity  levels  and  color.  Still  others  felt  it  was  too  much 
information to look at all at once, though some were interested in 
the patterns it revealed: 

“Obviously  I  get  a  lot  more  emails  than  phone  calls.  I’m  just 
laughing  at  how  small  phone  is  compared  to  email.  It’s  almost 
opposite  [on  the  weekend],  because  people  like  to  do  things  on 
Thursday/Friday and they’re not emailing me as much, and we’re 
trying to do stuff.” (P8) 

Some  users  were  able  to  find  congruencies  between  their  phone 
and email:  

“Emailing  and  phone  drops  right  about  3am  and  comes  back  at 
about 7. They’re sort of similar.” (P5)  

Another user linked a location from the list of phone keywords to 
a  friend’s  name  from  the  email  keywords,  both  occurring  within 
the same time interval: 

“I’m seeing Texas and [a friend’s name] together, which is cool. I 
was seeing [him] with a friend from Texas. This was happening at 
the same time. Interesting.” (P7)  

Participants  also  noted  that  media  served  different  purposes  in 
their  lives,  with  email  primarily pertaining  to  work,  while  phone 
to  people  mostly  on 
contacts  were  more  social:  “I 

talk 

30 

Fridays…because I try to go out.” (P10) “I personally don’t send 
any  emails  usually,  except  to  teachers.”  (P6)  “I  use  [email]  for 
school.  I  prefer  to  call  if  I  have  something…If  I  have  something 
short to say I would just text.” (P2) 
5.5  Overall Reactions 
All  users  found  the  tool  interesting—a  “cool  new  concept”  (P1). 
Only  two  participants  had  looked  at  a  similar  tool  in  the  past  or 
regularly checked their phone logs, while nine users “didn’t care 
about  this  stuff  before”  (P2)  or  “hadn’t  thought  about  it”  (P7). 
Most  users  said  they  enjoyed  playing  with  the  visualization  and 
looking at the pretty shapes and colors. Four were deeply curious 
about  their  statistics  down  to  each  hour,  with  one  claiming  he 
could “stare at this all day” (P11). 

Users suggested a number of more interactive features such as the 
ability to zoom into a specific date or time, or a play button that 
animates the accumulation of communication activity over time as 
a  way  to  give  a  glimpse  into  how  temporal  patterns  form.  One 
user’s suggestion of a geographic map displaying origins of phone 
calls  aligns  with  work  around  SenseCam  [32]  and  Google’s 
MyMaps [24] showing that location data can trigger memories. 

Five  users  saw  some  use  for  the  tool,  ranging  from  repeated  use 
“once  a  week”  (P1)  to  more  practical  goals  around  self-
monitoring. One user found his phone usage “alarming” (P5) after 
realizing  it  was  roughly  even  throughout  the  day,  citing  it  as  a 
good  reminder  to  watch  his  use  of  limited  free  daytime  minutes 
before  9pm.  Another  user  (P8)  wanted  to  cancel  his  texting 
services  after  seeing  how  little  he  actually  texted  each  month 
while paying for an unlimited texting plan. Three users claimed to 
see no practical application for the tool (“don’t need it to survive” 
(P6)),  while  seven  others  said  it  wasn’t  useful  but  “good  for 
reminiscing” (P3) or playing with out of curiosity. 
6.  DISCUSSION 
Our  experience  suggests  that,  although  pieTime  was  interesting 
and supported reflection, it did not accomplish its primary goal of 
focusing attention on patterns of behavior. Here, we would like to 
take a step back from pieTime and talk about why this is, and how 
our  results  apply  to  the  larger  collage  of  tools  for  reflection  on 
communication and behavior. 

Patterns complement particulars. Our work gives further evidence 
to the importance of helping people reflect on particular events as 
a way to understand their pasts. We had hoped to focus attention 
on  rhythms  by  downplaying  individual  events  in  our  design  in 
order to encourage people to process the past in the aggregate and 
in  the  large.  However,  as  with  other  such  tools  (e.g.,  [37][38]), 
people often used the data to reflect on specific experiences. This 
suggests  that  people  use  specific  incidents  and  events  as  a 
fundamental way of reminiscing, reflection, and understanding the 
past, and that even if the goal is seeing a “bigger picture”, details 
are important [34]. 

The  question  then  becomes  how  to  encourage people to  look  for 
patterns. Systems that provide a balance of aggregate and detailed 
behavioral information might be a sweet spot in this design space. 
Consider  a  lifelogging  tool  that  supports  exercise.  Patterns  over 
time  could  help  people  see  a  steady  increase  in  activity,  while 
providing  access  to  specific  moments  such  as  a  particularly  long 
or fast run, or the time they broke through a milestone, might be 
useful for reflection and motivation.  

Support storytelling. pieTime users were happier when they could 
make personal connections with the data. Users were interested in 
the  stories  that  they  could  tell  from  seeing  the  keywords  and 

 
patterns  provided  by  pieTime,  even  if  the  data  did  not  always 
immediately  make  sense.  These  snippets  of  the  past  motivate 
people to tell stories based on what they believe the snippets are 
about,  and  though  theories  of  autobiographical  memory  suggest 
that these stories are not perfect recallings of the exact event [6], 
these stories may help people more deeply understand themselves. 
Further,  people  commonly  wish  they  captured  more  meaningful 
information about their past [7][26]. 

the 

This  suggests  that  visualization  and  lifelogging  tools  should 
encourage  interpretation  and  storytelling  about  the  past,  to 
complement 
strengths  around  capture  and 
representation.  For  instance,  a  visualization  of  Facebook  data 
might  allow  people  to  pull  together  a  variety  of  media  and 
activities  to  tell  stories  about  their  relationships—a  manually 
curated version of its existing “See Friendship” feature. 

system’s 

identity  matter.  We  call  out 

Personalization  and 
identity 
management because another main outcome of our study was that 
people  were  much  more  convinced  about,  and engaged  with,  the 
system  when  they  felt  that  it  reflected  their  identity.  Users  felt 
proud  of  keywords  or  trends  they  thought  characterized  them: 
“You can tell I’m a geek” (P11). Evidence that assured people that 
data they saw was their own was satisfying, and helped them tell 
stories about who they were: 

“Yeah, [the visualization] seems pretty accurate to me, especially 
just the time of day. Even though I get up early in the morning, I 
try  not  to  send  e-mails  that  early  cause  I  don’t  want  people  to 
think  I’m crazy.  I  receive e-mails  from  other  crazies  at  2am  and 
1am. That’s so not me.” (P10)  

This  idea  of  seeing  data  that  reflects  one’s  identity  parallels  the 
idea  of  public  visualization  of  behavior  as  a  tool  for  creating 
public  identity  or  “social  capital”  [37].  Such  values  of  finding 
“personal 
“identity  presentation”  within 
visualizations  have  found  support  in  collaborative  visualization 
systems  as  well  [17],  while  identity  creation,  maintenance,  and 
management are a fundamental psychological concern.  

relevance” 

and 

Rhythms do support awareness. That said, pieTime users did find 
value  in  awareness  of  their  rhythms,  noticing  both  mundane  and 
unexpected patterns. While our study did not directly compare the 
use (or lack of use) of other data display tools with pieTime, some 
data  suggests  the  value  of  revealing  rhythms  that  might  seem 
obvious—as  with  the  user  who  regularly  checked  his  phone  bill, 
yet found motivation to change his service plan when he saw his 
usage  habits  visualized,  rather  than  as  a  list  of  numbers. 
Awareness  is  valuable  in  various  realms,  including  improvement 
of  personal  and  mental  health.  Supporting  awareness  of  rhythms 
and routines, for instance, can improve the life of the elderly [28]. 
These  patterns,  as  with  habit-finding  [31]  and  lifelogging  [19] 
systems, can support understanding and reflection. 

Thus,  designers  of  tools  for  reflection  should  consider  features 
that  help  people  see  these  aggregated  rhythms  while  still  having 
access to the particulars that appear to be necessary. One strategy 
would  be  to  allow  filtering  by  communication  partner,  by  time 
period, topic, or location, to allow people to see aggregations that 
might  be  more  meaningful  to  them.  Another  would  be  to  use  a 
spiral  layout  (e.g.,  [5])  that  gives  access  to  both  high-level  and 
detail  views,  although  in  pieTime’s  case  that  went  against  the 
aesthetic and conceptual goals of presenting parts of a whole.  

Limitations.  In  retrospect,  filtering  of  spam  and  mailing  lists 
would  have  made  rhythms  and  keywords  more  apparent  and 
meaningful;  further,  we  did  not  attempt  to  manage  timezone and 
character  encoding  differences.  Better  handling  of  these  issues 

31 

might  have  improved  the  experience.  Our  participants  were  also 
relatively  homogeneous.  Our  biggest  limitation,  however,  is  that 
we used a short term, lab-based deployment to evaluate pieTime. 
We  did  this  consciously,  to  protect  people’s  privacy,  to  guard 
against  bugs,  and  to  respond  to  limitations  in  our  resources  for 
conducting experiments. This limitation is not unique to our work. 
Almost all of the tools for visualizing conversation are evaluated 
in  similar  short-term,  one-time  use  scenarios,  and  given  our 
participants’  general  skepticism  toward  the  everyday  utility  of 
these tools, such one-shot evaluations might overstate their value. 
It  is  an  open  and  interesting  question  how  these  kinds  of  tools 
might  function  in  the  long  term  to  support  repeated  use  and 
continued reflection. 
7.  CONCLUSION 
We designed pieTime to visualize personal communication data in 
an  effort  to  reveal  temporal  rhythms  in  behavior  and  encourage 
reflection. It extends prior work around reflecting on conversation 
in several ways: focusing on aggregate behavior, providing views 
at multiple timescales, using multiple data sources, and choosing 
phone logs as an unusual, but revealing, source of behavioral data. 
Putting our results into the context of related prior efforts suggests 
reminiscence,  detail, 
that 
explanation, and storytelling are fundamental to how people think 
about their pasts, and that these aspects and activities need to be 
supported across a wide range of designs and goals. 

themes  around  personalization, 

Our  hope  is  that  future  tools  that  support  reflection  on  personal 
communication  archives  go  beyond  single-use  evaluations  and  a 
focus  toward  the  past.  Instead,  they  could  use  people’s  patterns 
and  stories  to  help  people  bring  the  present  into  focus,  and  to 
encourage  ongoing  reflection.  Adding  a  cyclical  element  to  the 
visualization  of  archived  data  is  one  way  to  help  people  to  not 
only  reflect  on  past  events,  or  relationships,  but  also  think  about 
their  behaviors  and  relationships  over  time:  from  their  past,  into 
their present, and perhaps with consequences for their future. By 
making tools about the past relevant to people’s present lives, we 
hope  we  can  create  a  world  where  visualizations  that  support 
reflection and self-understanding are less like childrens’ toys that 
are  played  with once and  forgotten, and  instead become  artifacts 
that integrate into our lives, much like the clocks that we hang on 
our walls. 
8.  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  would  like  to  acknowledge  Erica  Horowitz  and  Mitchell 
Davis for their work in helping to evaluate pieTime, and the NSF 
for support through grant IIS 08-35451. 

9.  REFERENCES 
[1]  Assogba, Y. and Donath, J. 2009. Mycrocosm: Visual 

microblogging. Proc. HICSS.  

[2]  Barton, S. 1994. Chaos, self-organization, and psychology. 

The American Psychologist, 49, 5–14.  

[3]  Begole, J., Tang, J., Smith, R., and Yankelovich, N. 2002. 
Work rhythms: Analyzing visualizations of awareness 
histories of distributed groups. Proc. CSCW, 334–343.  

[4]  Bergstrom, T. and Karahalios, K. 2007. Seeing more: 
visualizing audio cues. Proc. INTERACT, 29–42.  

[5]  Carlis, J. and Konstan, J. 1998. Interactive visualization of 

serial periodic data. Proc. UIST, 29–38.  

[6]  Conway, M. A. and Pleydell-Pearce, C. W. 2000. The 
construction of autobiographical memories in the self-
memory system. Psychol. Rev., 107(2): 261–288.  

 
[7]  Cosley, D., Akey, K., Alson, B., Baxter, J., Broomfield, M., 
Lee, S., and Sarabu, C. 2009. Using Technologies to Support 
Reminscence. BCS HCI, 480–484.  

[26] Petrelli, D., Whittaker, S., and Brockmeier, J. 2008. 

AutoTopography: What can physical mementos tell us about 
digital memories? Proc. CHI, 53–62.  

[8]  DiMicco, J., Hollenbach, K., and Bender, W. 2006. Using 

[27] Rachlin, H. 1995. The value of temporal patterns in behavior. 

visualizations to review a group’s interaction dynamics. 
Proc. CHI, 706–711. 

[9]  Donath, J., Viégas, F., and Karahalios, K. 1999. Visualizing 

conversation. Proc. HICSS, 2023–2031.  

Curr. Directions in Psych. Sci., 4(6), 188–192.  

[28] Riche, Y. and Mackay, W. 2010. PeerCare: supporting 

awareness of rhythms and routines for better aging in place. 
JCSCW, 19(1), 73–104.  

[10] Dörk, M., Gruen, D., Williamson, C., and Carpendale S. 
2010. A visual backchannel for large-scale events. Proc. 
InfoVis, (16)6, 1129–1138.  

[29] Samiei, M., Dill, J., and Kirkpatrick, A. 2004. EzMail: Using 

information visualization techniques to help manage email. 
Proc. InfoVis, 477–482.  

[11] Eagle, N. and Pentland, A. 2006. Reality mining: sensing 

[30] Schiano, D. J., Chen, C. P., Isaacs, E., Ginsberg, J., 

complex social systems. Pers. Ubiq. Comp., 255–268.  

[12] Fisher, D. and Dourish, P. 2004. Social and temporal 

Gretarsdottie, U., and Huddleston, M. 2002. Teen use of 
messaging media. Proc. CHI, 594–595.  

structures in everyday collaboration. Proc. CHI, 551–558.  

[31] Schwarz, J., Mankoff, J., and Matthews, H. S. 2009. 

[13] Flanagin, A. and Metzger, M. 2001. Internet use in the 

contemporary media environment. Human Comm. Research, 
27(1), 153–181.  

[14] Golder, S., Wilkinson, D., and Huberman, B. A. 2007. 

Rhythms of social interaction: Messaging within a massive 
online network. Proc. C&T, 41–66.  

[15] Grinter, R. E. and Eldridge, M. A. 2003. Wan2tlk?: Everyday 

text messaging. Proc. CHI, 441–448.  

[16] Hallnäs, L. and Redström, J. 2001. Slow Technology: 

Designing for reflection. Pers. Ubiq. Comp., 5(3), 201–212.  

[17] Heer, J. and Agrawala, M. 2008. Design considerations for 
collaborative visual analytics. Proc. InfoVis, 171–178.  

[18] Jones, Q., Moldovan, M., Raban, D., and Butler, B. 2008. 

Empirical evidence of information overload constraining chat 
channel community interactions. Proc. CSCW, 323–332.  

[19] Li, I., Dey, A. K., and Forlizzi, J. F. 2010. A stage-based 

model of personal informatics. Proc. CHI, 1549–1552.  

[20] Lindley, S. E., Randall, D., Harper, R., Glancy, M., and 

Smyth, N. 2009. Reflecting on oneself and on others: 
Multiple perspectives via SenseCam. CHI workshop on 
Designing for Reflection on Experience.  

[21] Mint. http://www.mint.com 

[22] Museum of Me. http://www.intel.com/museumofme 

[23] Peesapati, S. T., Schwanda, V., Schultz, J., Lepage, M., 

Jeong, S., and Cosley, D. 2010. Pensieve: Supporting 
everyday reminiscence. Proc. CHI, 2027–2036.  

[24] Peesapati, S. T., Schwanda, V., Schultz, J., and Cosley, D. 
2010. Triggering memories with online maps. Proc. ASIST, 
1–4.  

[25] Perer, A., Shneiderman, B., and Oard, D. W. 2005. Using 
rhythms of relationships to understand email archives. 
JASIST, 57, 1936–1948.  

Reflections of everyday activities in spending data. Proc. 
CHI, 1737–1740. 

[32] Sellen, A., Fogg, A., Aitken, M., Hodges, S., Rother, C., and 
Wood, K. 2007. Do life-logging technologies support 
memory for the past? An experimental study using 
SenseCam. Proc. CHI, 81–90.  

[33] Sengers, P., Boehner, K., David, S., and Kaye, J. 2005. 

Reflective design. Critical Computing, 49–58.  

[34] Shneiderman, B. 1996. The eyes have it: a task by data type 

taxonomy of information visualizations. Proc. IEEE 
Symposium on Visual Languages ’96, 336–343. 

[35] Sorokin, P. and Merton, R. 1937. Social time: a 

methodological and functional analysis. American Journal of 
Sociology, 42(5), 615–629.  

[36] Swearingen, K. and Sinha, R. 2002. Interaction design for 

recommender systems. Proc. DIS.  

[37] Viégas, F., boyd, d., Nguyen, D. H., Potter, J., and Donath, J. 
2004. Digital artifacts for remembering and storytelling: 
PostHistory and social network fragments. Proc. HICSS.  

[38] Viégas, F., Golder, S., and Donath, J. 2006. Visualizing 

email content: Portraying relationships from conversational 
histories. Proc. CHI, 979–988.  

[39] Viégas, F., Wattenberg, M., and Dave, K. 2004. Studying 

cooperation and conflict between authors with history flow 
visualizations. Proc. CHI, 575–582. 

[40] Webster, J. D. and McCall, M. E. 1999. Reminiscence 

functions across adulthood: A replication and extension. J 
Adult Dev. 6(1), 73–85. 

[41] Wong, P. T. B. 1995. The process of adaptive reminiscence. 
In The art and science of reminiscing: Theory, research, 
methods and application, 23–35. Taylor & Francis. 

32 

 
 
 
 
