UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

No Longer Wearing: Investigating the Abandonment of
Personal Health-Tracking Technologies on Craigslist

James Clawson, Jessica A. Pater, Andrew D Miller†, Elizabeth D. Mynatt, Lena Mamykina‡

Georgia Institute of Technology
{jamer,pater,mynatt}@gatech.edu

†University of Washington
millerad@uw.edu

‡Columbia University
om2196@cumc.columbia.edu

ABSTRACT
Personal health-tracking technologies have become a part
of mainstream culture.
Their growing popularity and
widespread adoption present an opportunity for the design of
new interventions to improve wellness and health. However,
there is an increasing concern that these technologies are fail-
ing to inspire long-term adoption. In order to understand why
users abandon personal health-tracking technologies, we ana-
lyzed advertisements of secondary sales of such technologies
on Craigslist. We conducted iterative inductive and deduc-
tive analyses of approximately 1600 advertisements of per-
sonal health-tracking technologies posted over the course of
one month across the US. We identify health motivations and
rationales for abandonment and present a set of design im-
plications. We call for improved theories that help translate
between existing theories designed to explain psychological
effects of health behavior change and the technologies that
help people make those changes.

Author Keywords
technology abandonment; health-tracking; self-monitoring

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.m. Information Interfaces and Presentation: Misc.

INTRODUCTION
New advances in sensing technologies have exponentially in-
creased their availability for individuals of all walks of life.
As a result, individuals are capable of tracking and moni-
toring a variety of activities and generate volumes of self-
monitoring data. Self-monitoring enthusiasts, like quantiﬁed
selfers [25], advocate the multiple beneﬁts of self-monitoring
technologies and their ability to lead to insight and increased
self-knowledge.

One area where wearable self-monitoring technologies re-
ceive particular attention is in the domain of health and well-
ness. Physical-activity trackers (e.g., Fitbit), digital scales,
bluetooth-equipped heart-rate monitors, and other emerging
sensors give rise to mobile health (mHealth) applications to

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation 
on the ﬁrst page.  Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the 
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
UbiComp ’15, September 7-11, 2015, Osaka, Japan.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3574-4/15/09...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2807554

647

collect data about users’ activities and states with minimal
burden, easing the process of self-monitoring [22]. Marketing
research shows that these technologies have reached a wide
level of adoption among American customers: as a product
sector, predictions indicate that wearable personal-tracking
technologies will eclipse $70 Billion by 2024 [20]. HCI re-
search on self-tracking has made great strides towards under-
standing the motivations that lead individuals to adopt novel
sensing technologies into their daily lives [6, 38].

However, together with this enthusiasm, there exists consid-
erable and growing skepticism regarding these technologies
and their ability to inspire and sustain individuals’ ongoing
engagement with their everyday health and wellness [17]. A
recent study suggests that one third of all Americans who pur-
chased a wearable self-monitoring product abandoned it after
only 6 months of use [23]. Many interpret these ﬁndings as
indicative of the failure of wearable health technologies to
inspire continuous engagement and interest from their users,
and question the beneﬁts and even the survival of these tech-
nologies [15, 19]. However, an in-depth account of the rea-
sons why individuals abandon their wearable self-monitoring
devices is lacking. This scholarship is important as it could
enrich the existing knowledge on how individuals engage or
fail to engage with self-monitoring technologies and suggest
directions for future designs and research.

In this paper we examine why users abandon self-monitoring
technologies. This problem is challenging to study with
traditional qualitative methods, such as interviews or focus
groups, because of the potential bias in the sampling of par-
ticipants. To address this limitation, we examined a less tra-
ditional but potentially rich destination for ‘abandoned’ ﬁt-
ness technologies: secondary sales in online marketplaces.
Speciﬁcally, we focused on posts from the classiﬁed ad site
Craigslist, collecting advertisements for sales of common
consumer ﬁtness trackers that took place over the course of
one month across the US. We analyzed and iteratively coded
the approximately 1600 posts that matched our criteria to un-
derstand sellers’ point of abandonment, motivation for dis-
carding the technology, and any additional comments or sto-
ries included in the posts. Throughout the analysis of our
data, we adopted the assumption that, while there are def-
inite outliers that are abandoning their technologies based
on “positive” rationales, most abandoning of health-tracking
technologies are ultimately a “negative” activity because the
owner has not fully exploited the beneﬁts of using that tech-
nology.

The results of our study suggest a more optimistic view of the
adoption potential of wearable self-monitoring technologies
than recent studies and media reports may suggest. While
the rate of abandonment may indeed be high, our analysis
reveals that not all acts of technology abandonment are mo-
tivated by a perceived lack of utility or borne out of frustra-
tion with the device. We discovered abandonment happening
due to a host of unassociated reasons. These include produc-
tive rationales for abandonment (goals obtained, technolog-
ical upgrades), rationales associated with one’s social envi-
ronment or physical abilities (social connections, health con-
ditions, changes in activities associated with device), and a
mismatch between users’ expectations and the capabilities of
the device - the most common rationale for abandonment in
our dataset. This suggests that personal health-tracking tech-
nologies are used in complex dynamic social environments
and need to ﬁt within individuals existing, messy practices
[2]. Based on our analysis, we propose enriching the contem-
porary theoretical landscape with theories of sense-making,
problem-solving, and experiential learning that can provide
more direct guidance to the design of self-monitoring tech-
nologies and expand capacity for users to gain deeper insight
and discovery into their everyday health. Finally, we present
a set of design recommendations to assist designers in cre-
ating technologies that inspire sustained evolving adoption.
As such, our work makes the following contributions to HCI
research:
• We present the ﬁrst investigation into the abandonment of
wearable health-tracking technologies outside of a particu-
lar intervention or technology.

• We analyze people’s own accounts of personal-tracking
technology abandonment through an exploration of sec-
ondary sales on Craigslist.

• We identify health motivations and rationales for abandon-
ment and connect these actions to current theories in health
behavior change.

• We describe implications for designing health-tracking
technologies that, in the future, will not be so easily aban-
doned.

RELATED WORK

Health trackers and quantiﬁed self
In recent years, the increasing availability of commercial
activity monitoring devices has inspired interest from the
research community regarding their ability to inspire self-
reﬂection and positive behavior change. Even at this early
stage, studies of activity-tracking technologies (e.g. pedome-
ters) prove effective at improving individuals’ physical ac-
tivity [7, 27, 32].
In addition to studying these technolo-
gies from the perspective of health and wellness [22, 28, 34],
HCI researchers also study their potential for improving self-
knowledge (personal informatics) [25, 26], augmenting mem-
ory [18], and reducing environmental impact [10].

More recently, wide adoption of such devices from Jawbone,
FitBit and Nike created opportunities for interactive applica-
tions that target a range of individuals’ behavioral goals and
activities. These platforms allow for custom application de-
velopment with a more sophisticated set of features through

648

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

their coupling with smartphone applications and the fact they
have open APIs. There is ongoing research focused on the
accuracy of these devices [14, 43]. In addition, there are also
early efforts to utilize these devices for delivery of behav-
ior change interventions from increases in physical activity
[24, 44] to improvement in quality of sleep [4, 5, 21, 39] to
playful interaction through personal data [30]. The quantiﬁed
self movement garnered attention in the research literature
as well, as they represent early adopters of these behavior-
tracking technologies [6, 25, 38, 42].

Abandoning technology
The abandonment of health technology is not a new phe-
nomenon. However, few systematic studies exist of why
people stop using health technologies. While the assistive
technology community looks at adoption and abandonment
of clinician-provided personal health technologies, their ﬁnd-
ings do not fully capture today’s consumer-led health tracker
market. For example, in a 1993 study of assistive technol-
ogy abandonment, Phillips & Zhao describe four factors: 1)
lack of consideration of user opinion in selecting the devices;
2) poor device performance; 3) the ease of procuring the de-
vices; and 4) change in user needs or priorities [35]. The ﬁrst
two factors are less applicable in today’s consumer-focused
health tracker industry: consumers often buy health trackers
directly, and the devices themselves (particularly movement
trackers) have become more robust and accurate over the last
several years. However, the last two are still relevant today.
Phillips & Zhao found that the easier it was for users to ac-
quire a device, the quicker they were to abandon it. These
days, a decent health-tracking device can be found for rela-
tively little money at any number of stores or online retailers.

More recently, the researchers within the CHI and Ubiquitous
Computing communities have also started to explore aban-
donment. For example, Cordeiro et al. surveyed food jour-
nalers and examined forum posts to identify reasons people
stop using food diaries [8] and Schwanda et al. explored rea-
sons individuals abandon using the Wii Fit as health tech-
nology while advocating that researchers and designers con-
sider the role that persuasive technologies play in encourag-
ing healthy habits [40].

However, to date, there has been little work directly ex-
amining the adoption and abandonment of wearable self-
monitoring technologies [23]. While Fritz et al. explored
the adoption of wearable health trackers [9], only an Inter-
net study conducted by Endeavour Partners has investigated
the abandonment of these technologies [23]. They report
that one in ten Americans over 18 owned an activity tracker,
such as Jawbone or Fitbit, suggesting that wearable devices
are ﬁnally achieving mass market penetration. On the other
hand, the study reports that a third of U.S. consumers who
have owned one of these devices stopped using it within six
months of receiving it. These numbers certainly inspire con-
cern; however, while the report suggested many directions for
improving adoption, it did not explicitly addressed the rea-
sons why these devices are abandoned. The goal of our study
focused on examining these reasons and drawing conclusions
for the design of future wearable health-technologies.

SESSION: ENGAGEMENT AND DISENGAGEMENT

Health behavior change theory
When considering issues of technology adoption and aban-
donment, it is important to reﬂect on the driving forces behind
these technologies as well as the theoretical foundations that
ground them. Many contemporary technologies for health
self-monitoring and self-management are inspired by theories
of health behavior change. For example, in Social Cognitive
Theory, a health tracker can enable interpersonal interactions
to facilitate observational learning [1]. Similarly, in individ-
ual models such as the Theory of Planned Behavior, health
trackers may succeed or fail an individual to the extent that
they enable or inhibit a person’s perceived behavioral con-
trol [11]. Goal Setting Theory predicts that an appropriately-
targeted speciﬁc goal is more likely achievable than not [41].

At both the interpersonal and individual level, health behav-
ior change theories themselves give little advice to developers
and researchers of health trackers on exactly how the tech-
nologies can best take advantage of theory [37]. HCI re-
searchers have begun to address this issue through empirical
study (such as Munson & Consolvo’s research on goal-setting
for physical activity [33]). Others have called for technolo-
gists and health researchers to work closer together [16].

METHODOLOGY
The goal of this project is to better understand the ratio-
nale behind why people abandon technology, more speciﬁ-
cally health-tracking technologies. Even though people will
certainly complain online through reviews and customer ser-
vice platforms, those who abandon technology do not typi-
cally discuss their abandonment decisions online in any cen-
tralized forum. To that end, we chose to investigate aban-
donment in the public marketplace. The marketplace chosen
for this study is Craigslist. We posit that when an individual
sells a health-tracking technology, they are actively abandon-
ing said technology. To achieve our research objective ex-
ploring why people choose to abandon technologies, we ﬁrst
selected a set of popular health-monitoring technologies, col-
lected sales posts associated with the selected technologies,
and conducted a content analysis of the sales posts.

Technology selection
To begin, we researched the pervasiveness and popularity of
health trackers. Based on their sales rankings on Amazon, we
selected personal health-monitoring technologies as the ba-
sis for data collection in this study. These technology brands
included Fitbit, Jawbone, iHealth, Polar, Omron, Withings,
Fuelband, and Eatsmart. We did not discriminate between
speciﬁc technologies within these brands during the data col-
lection instead choosing to be inclusive of all tracking tech-
nologies within those brands. In total, we collected data on
21 individual technologies (see Table 1).

Data Collection
We used the technology brands identiﬁed through Amazon
as the seed terms to search Craigslist postings. We collected
posts from July 1 to July 31, 2014 from all 416 U.S. Craigslist
city directories. For each Craigslist posting added to our
dataset, we collected information regarding the search term
used to ﬁnd the advertisement, the state and city from which

649

Brand
Eatsmart
Fitbit
iHealth
Jawbone
Nike
Omron
Polar
Withings

Technologies
Scale
Aria, Flex, Force, One, Ultra, Zip, unclassiﬁed
Scale
UP, UP24, unclassiﬁed
Fuelband
blood pressure, nebulizer, pedometer, scale
heart rate monitor, watch
blood pressure, scale

Table 1. Selected Technologies

the post originated, the text of the post, the post ID, and the
hyperlink to the post. When we purged duplicate posts from
the data, we were left with a total of 1561 results.

The majority of the posts in our initial dataset represented
traditional sales advertisements in that they provided no in-
sight into why an individual would be selling/abandoning the
health-tracking technology. The quote below is an example
of a traditional advertisement.

“I am selling my Nike Fuelband, its medium/large size
and black.
It comes with the box and all accessories.
Can meet up around the metrotown area.”

We found that traditional advertisements did little to help us
understand abandonment and as such decided to remove these
types of posts from our data. We reﬁned our dataset to only
include posts that contained some sort of personal story at-
tached to the advertisement. Posts with personal stories re-
lated to the technology had the potential to provide informa-
tion about why the individual was choosing to abandon their
technology. We coded the dataset for personal stories result-
ing in a dataset containing 462 posts.

Code Book
We used an inductive approach to analyzing the 462 posts that
included a personal story. A team of three researchers inde-
pendently open coded a randomized sample (10.0% ) of the
personal story posts. We coded for general themes in the data.
Next, we met as a group to discuss themes and further reﬁne
the coding taxonomy. Technology use, rationale for sale, the
time of ownership, and motivation for health use were the
general themes that emerged.

We developed a list of themes for our initial codebook (see
Table 2 for the list of high-level themes).and each coder re-
sampled another 10% of the data. The coding had an inter-
rater reliability of 92.0%. The team met to discuss what types
of categories were present in each of the themes and further
reﬁned and expanded the codebook. A third and ﬁnal cod-
ing exercise took place with a randomized 10.0% sample of
the data. An inter-rater reliability of 96.0% was achieved be-
tween the three researchers.

Two researchers independently coded the reduced dataset us-
ing the reﬁned codebook developed by the team. During
this process, an additional 24 records were ﬂagged by the
researchers as not having a personal story attached to the
record. The team met, discussed each of these records, and
agreed to take them out of the dataset. They also chose to

Category
Technology
Technology Acquisition
Condition
Technology Count
Abandonment Point: Time
Abandonment Point: Use
Abandonment Rationale
Health Motivations

Number of Codes
23
6
5
4
7
7
15
17

Table 2. The categories that organized our codes

remove all posts where a ﬁtness tracker was part of a bulk
sale/yard sale because in these posts the seller typically lists
a large number of items and the personal story relates to the
sale of all items, not just the ﬁtness tracker. Finally, the team
chose to remove all posts in which the seller was simply dis-
cussing spare parts (wristbands, extra straps, or power chords
for example). This process generated the ﬁnal dataset which
contained 427 advertisements.

In total, we found 1561 Craiglist posts met our criteria during
the month of July 2014. Sampling that dataset to remove all
posts that did not contain personal stories, resulted in a set of
462 advertisements. Further sampling of the data to remove
advertisements for parts and all posts where a ﬁtness tracker
was part of a bulk/yard sale resulted in a ﬁnal dataset com-
posed of 427 records.

RESULTS
We begin by describing the technologies present in the posts
and then move on to discuss the acquisition of the technology,
the condition of the technology, the abandonment point, the
rationale behind the abandonment, and conclude with health
motivations related to the abandonment of the technology.

Health-tracking technologies for sale
The ﬁnal dataset consisted of 427 Craigslists posts that con-
tained advertisements for 470 health-tracking technologies.
Several posts (3.6% of total posts) in our dataset were selling
multiples of the same item or selling trackers in tandem, for
example selling a smart scale and a ﬁtness tracker in the same
advertisement. Taken together, the Fitbit (180), Nike Fuel-
band (130) and Jawbone (111) technologies accounted for the
vast majority of the technologies in the dataset (38.3%, 29.3%
and 22.3% respectively). Wearables (436 items) accounted
for 92.8% of all the advertisements in the dataset, while scales
(18 items) comprised 3.8% of the data and blood pressure
monitors (16 items) accounted for the remaining 3.4%. Table
3 highlights the breakdown of these technologies.

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

Number of Items for Sale % of total items

Technology
Eatsmart scale
Fitbit (unclassiﬁed)
Fitbit aria
Fitbit ﬂex
Fitbit force
Fitbit one
Fitbit ultra
Fitbit zip
iHealth
Jawbone (unclassiﬁed)
Jawbone UP
Jawbone UP 24
Nike fuelband
Omron blood pressure
Omron pedometer
Omron scale
Polar heartrate monitor
Polar watch
Withing blood pressure
Total

0.2%
10.9%
3.0%
16.0%
0.2%
4.7%
0.9%
2.8%
0.2%
4.9%
12.8%
6.0%
27.7%
3.0%
0.4%
0.4%
3.0%
2.8%
0.4%
100%
Table 3. Technology distributions across the craigslist posts

1
51
14
75
1
22
4
13
1
23
60
28
130
14
2
2
14
13
2
470

Acquisition method
Found
Gift
Purchased
Won
Employment/School program
Not reported

Technology count
3
88
123
18
3
238

Technology %
0.6%
18.6%
26.0%
3.8%
0.6%
50.3%

Table 4. Technology acquisition method

Acquisition method turns out to be an interesting component
of the advertisements when observed through an abandon-
ment lens. Individuals who purchased their technology typ-
ically had a greater sense of ownership over their device(s)
than those who won or were given the technology. For ex-
ample, a person who won a health-tracking technology was
much more likely to abandon the technology immediately,
sell it new in box, and explicitly abandon the technology
for monetary reasons. Below is a typical advertisement for
a health-tracking technology that someone won:

“I just won a ﬁtbit ﬂex valued at $99.99 but I know I
won’t use it and hope to make a fair deal with someone
who would. Brand new not even opened”

Compare that to a typical example of an advertisement in
which the seller had purchased her technology.

“Hi, I’m selling my Jawbone UP 24. Purchased brand
new...No defects, works great...I am not using it like I
thought I would so I ﬁgured I would re-sell and get some
of my money back since I cannot return it.”

Initial Technology Acquisition
We coded each advertisement to note if there was a descrip-
tion regarding how the individual seller had acquired their
technology, as we were interested in the relationship between
ownership, adoption, and abandonment. Roughly half of our
posts (50.3%) described the method by which the seller came
to own their technology. Table 4 reﬂects the breakdown of
the posts in our dataset as it relates to the speciﬁc acquisition
method.

In the case of the individual who purchased the technology,
they were at some point interested in using a personal health-
tracking technology to collect health information. Though
they did not sustain their initial interest in ﬁtness-tracking,
they at least tried out the technology and owned the device for
a period of time before deciding to abandon it. In contrast, the
individual who won the technology had no interest in using
the device at all: they simply won a new ﬁtness tracker and
are taking advantage of that opportunity to make some money.

650

SESSION: ENGAGEMENT AND DISENGAGEMENT

Condition
New
Opened
Used
Damaged
Not reported

Technology count
97
32
301
3
37
Table 5. Technology condition

Technology %
20.6%
6.8%
64.0%
0.6%
7.9%

Our data indicates that giving someone a health-tracking tech-
nology as a gift can be a risky endeavor as there is a high
probability of a mismatch between the giver’s idea of what
a good health-monitoring technology is and receiver’s own
idea. Given the multitude of available technologies, ﬁnding
the right match is not always easy. We labeled advertisements
as gifts if the individual selling the health tracker was either
the recipient or the giver of a gift. The gift category is par-
ticularly illuminating when considered in conjunction with
Abandonment Rationale category (discussed in detail below).
For example, 20.5% of people who received a health activity
tracker as a present already owned a similar device (18 of
88). Similarly, in 18.2% of the posts containing gifts (16 of
88) there was an expectation mismatch between the giver and
the receiver.

When there was an expectation mismatch between the giver
and the receiver, the advertisements were much more similar
to posts in which the seller had won the technology than posts
where they had purchased the technology. In both of these
cases, the device was never really adopted by owner and the
device was quickly abandoned.

Technology Condition
On the secondary market, health-tracking technologies are
sold in various conditions ranging from unopened to well
used and even occasionally broken. Table 5 shows the dis-
tribution of products organized by their condition.

Items were only labeled “new” if they were still in the origi-
nal packaging. Posts were labeled as “used” if the advertise-
ment said it was used or if the seller had discussed the use
of the technology. Labeling posts as new and used was rela-
tively straightforward, however, we did encounter an interest-
ing edge case that we termed “Opened.” A device was labeled
as “opened” if the technology was no longer contained within
the original packaging and yet the seller had not actually used
the device. Here is an example of such a post:

“Nike fuel band here, was bought as a gift but it’s too
small, still brand new only opened to try on was never
turned on or synced to a computer asking $120”

These are interesting posts from an abandonment perspective.
The seller is abandoning the technology without having used
it but, in most cases, the seller was interested in at least trying
on the wearable. Below we discuss in detail various rationales
for selling health-tracking devices on Craigslist. One of the
rationales frequently mentioned is that the device in question
did not ﬁt or that it was the wrong size. Of the 32 devices that
were labeled as “opened,” 11 of the advertisements (34.4%)
described sizing/ﬁt as the reason that the technology is for

651

sale. Though “opened” is a small category, it contains the
largest number of posts where the rationale for selling the
technology is because it did not ﬁt.

Abandonment point
“Abandonment point” is the term we coined to capture both
the amount of time the individual had owned the device as
well as the amount of use the device had seen while in pos-
session of the owner. Essentially, we wanted to know when
the individual decided to abandon the technology.

Duration of time before abandonment
Determining how long a piece of technology was owned prior
to it being posted on Craigslist was challenging. Unfortu-
nately, the majority of the posts (60.0%) did not contain time-
related information. From the posts where we were able
to ascertain this information, 29.4% of the items had been
owned for weeks, months, or even years (see Table 6). On the
surface, this observation appears to be an encouraging ﬁnd-
ing. However, just because someone owns something for a
long period of time doesn’t correlate to that individual using
the technology to maximize the health utility afforded by its
functions or designs. By design, most wearable health ﬁtness
trackers are worn daily - not worn a few times and then, liter-
ally, put on the shelf for a later date. For example:

“Got this a year ago for Mother’s Day (I’d asked for it)
but I’ve only used it for about 3 weeks - a year ago!
Thus it is in mint condition, still in box with all the ac-
cessories (charging cable and an extra bit to change the
size). It’s looking for someone who will treat it better -
likely someone more determined to get ﬁt!?”

When examining posts in which it was clear that the indi-
vidual was immediately abandoning the health technology, it
was likely that the individual did not purchase the technology
(only 5 of 23), that it was either new or opened but not used
(20 of 23), and that the seller was abandoning the technology
without using it (20 of 23).

Abandonment point
Immediate
Day(s)
Week(s)
Month(s)
Year(s)
Vague
Not reported
Total

Technology Count
23
13
51
77
10
17
282
470

Technology %
4.9%
2.8%
10.9%
16.4%
2.1%
3.6%
60.0%
100%

Table 6. The amount of time people report owning and using their de-
vices before selling them.

Frequency of use before abandonment
In addition to tracking the amount of time an individual
owned a health-tracking technology, we were also interested
in determining the amount of use the technology had expe-
rienced prior to abandonment.A quarter (23.4%) of the tech-
nologies in our dataset were either completely unused or had
been used only once. Here is an example of a post in which
the seller is abandoning the technology immediately having
never used it (“unused’).

Abandonment Rationale
Activity change
Change in health status
Expectation mismatch
Experimentation
Goal met
Monetary
Owns a similar device
Peer inﬂuence
Purchased/received wrong item
Sizing/ﬁt
Technical complexity
Technology failure
Upgrade
Not reported
Vague
Total

Technology Count
21
5
119
7
5
30
44
12
10
27
10
5
48
61
66
470

Technology %
4.5%
1.1%
25.3%
1.5%
1.1%
6.4%
9.4%
2.6%
2.1%
5.7%
2.1%
1.1%
10.2%
13.0%
14.0%
100%

Table 7. What motivated individuals to sell their activity tracker on
Craigslist

“I have two brand new Fitbit Flex activity monitors.
These are unopened, brand new, unused... How clear
can I be about it. They are NEW... I got these through
my employers health plan so they are legitimate.”’

Contrast that with a post in which the individual describes
their investment in tracking their behavior and are abandoning
their current technology for a technology that better matches
their current needs.

“Am selling both of the following Polar Heart Rate mon-
itors along with the data transfer unit with which you
can upload your workouts to Polar’s free weblog...The
watches are 3 years old and we used them for 2 years.
We really liked them while we used them, with just
enough features to be neither too complicated nor too
simple. They still work perfectly well, and we are sell-
ing them as we decided to get GPS + HR watche.”

Surprisingly, only 1.3% of the technology being abandoned
had received moderate usage. Perhaps it is the nature of col-
lecting abandonment data through an examination of second
hand sales that we did not ﬁnd usage to be more evenly dis-
tributed. Certainly individuals interested in selling a tech-
nology will attempt to cast it in the best possible light and
downplaying the amount of use is an easy way to do so.

Abandonment Rationale
Understanding the rationale behind abandoning these health
behavior-tracking technologies is one of the primary goals of
our work. We ended our inductive coding with 13 different
rationale categories (15 in total including “Not reported” and
“Vague”). See Table 7 for a list of all the categories as well
as the distribution of technology advertisements amongst the
categories.

Posts were labeled as containing “activity change” when the
seller indicates that something about his/her life or goals have
changed such that the health behavior tracker is no longer
tracking behaviors of interest.

“I am selling a like-new Jawbone Up 24 is in perfect con-
dition and works just like the day I bought it. ... There
is nothing wrong with it, I am selling it so that I can

652

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

purchase a waterproof ﬁtness tracker. I do a lot of swim-
ming and scuba, and the Up isn’t waterproof...”

Activity change however does not always mean that the seller
is further engaging in tracking activity. Sometimes the activ-
ity change relates to decreasing tracking activity.

“Both of these [ﬁtbits] work great. My wife and I used
them a year ago, but now we have a little one and have
no need to know how much activity we are getting. We
already know we are getting plenty.”

We labeled posts with the “change in health status” category
when individuals posted ads selling their technology because
they could no longer use it due to a change in their health.

“I am selling my UP24 Jawbone. It is a black medium
band that is only a month old. I had shoulder surgery
recently and anything on my wrist whether it be a watch
or this aggravates my shoulder. Therefore I am selling it
because I can’t wear it without being in pain...”

Posts were labeled with “Expectation mismatch” when the
seller is abandoning a technology because either the technol-
ogy did not do what was expected or, much more common in
the dataset, the individual is no longer using the device in the
way that they anticipated when they ﬁrst acquired the tech-
nology.

“Not using it
shouldn’t have these gadgets. Excellent condition...”

like I thought I would...lazy people

The “Experimentation” category was an unexpected ﬁnd. In
each of the of these posts, the seller describes acquiring sev-
eral different ﬁtness trackers in an effort to determine which
tracker they will choose to keep and integrate into their lives.

“I have both a brand new ﬁtbit ﬂex that was used for a
month, and a jawbone up that was only opened to see
how it would ﬁt and feel when worn. Both of them I am
selling because I found a different ﬁtness band that will
suit me better.”

There were several straightforward categories such as “goal
met” - the individual lost the weight they wanted to lose or
achieved their desired number of steps and decided to sell
the technology since they had accomplished their goal. The
“Monetary,” “Owns a similar device,” “Purchased/received
wrong item,” “Sizing/ﬁt,” and “Upgrade” categories are self-
explanatory. The two technology categories “Technical com-
plexity” and “Technology failure” are similar in that in both
cases individuals are selling their technology due to their
challenges interacting with the technology (either due to fail-
ure on the part of the technology or failure on the part of the
user to be able to comfortably interact with the technology).
In both cases, the individuals are selling the technology out
of frustration, the frustration comes from different places de-
pending on where the fault lies.

“Brand New ﬁtbit with rubber case!!! I dont have the
I cant ﬁnd it so Id rather just
charger with it though.
sell it rather than going through the process of buying
another charger.”

SESSION: ENGAGEMENT AND DISENGAGEMENT

“...Like New Jawbone UP for sale...i Couldn’t ﬁgure out
how to use it...I’m still old school and have trouble with
my intelligent fhone.”

The ﬁnal category worth detailing is “Peer inﬂuence.” There
are clear implications for the design of personal ﬁtness-
tracking technology contained in these posts. For an adver-
tisement to be labeled “peer inﬂuence” there needed to be
evidence that the seller was abandoning their current technol-
ogy because it did not support their desire to compete with
their friends who happen to be using a different platform.

“Like new ﬁt bit ﬂex. had no issues with it, buddy had
up24 and we wanted to compete so I switched over. but
still great piece I have everything it comes with. also the
large band still has original plastic over it.”

Excluding posts in which the reason for abandoning the tech-
nology was either “not reported” or was “vague” (accounting
for 27.0% of the advertisements) “expectation mismatch” was
the most popular reason for selling a health tracking technol-
ogy on Craigslist (24.4%). The next most popular reasons
for individuals to abandon technology was to “upgrade” their
activity tracker (9.8%) or because they had received a new
activity tracker but “already owned a similar device (9.1%).

Assessing Health Motivation
In our analysis, we tried to understand whether or not there
was a health motivation behind the sale of a particular de-
vice. In some cases, the sale of a device seemed to be associ-
ated with a decrease in health motivation. Yet in others, sell-
ers appeared to be discarding a particular device because the
scaffolding afforded through the device was no longer nec-
essary: they had either achieved their goal or needed a more
sophisticated device to support changes associated with the
increasing the level of activity in their lifestyle. We were in-
terested in understanding if the motivation behind abandoning
the technology was internal (self driven) or external (inﬂu-
enced by others). Further, we were wanted to determine if the
motivation was increasing, decreasing or unchanged. Table 8
shows a complete breakdown of the health motivations coded
in the dataset.

Health Motivation
Internal decrease
Unchanged
Internal increase
External decrease
External increase
Internal change in goal
Not reported
Total

Technology Count
123
85
11
13
6
3
229
470

Technology %
26.2%
18.1%
2.3%
2.8%
1.3%
0.6%
48.7%
100%

Table 8. A breakdown of the health motivations found in the dataset..

Of the 470 technologies for sale in our dataset, almost half
(48.7%) reported no health motivation for abandoning their
technology. Furthermore, an additional 18.1% of the records
showed an unchanged health motivation. An example of posts
in this category:

“Selling my nike fuelband. It’s the clear band. Just re-
ceived one as a gift and don’t need two...I’ve only had it
for 3 months.”

653

Looking at the remaining posts, 33.2% discuss an explicit
change in health motivation underlying the abandonment of
their technology. These can be divided into four distinct cat-
egories: personal (internal) changes in health goals; personal
(internal) changes in physical activity or capability; begin-
ning a new ﬁtness program or gym membership and track-
ing health with that institution instead of individually (exter-
nal); or changing jobs/schools and being barred from using
the technology in the new facility (external).

Though often not speciﬁed in detail, many of the posts con-
tain unique glimpses of sellers’ health motivation. Many sell-
ers reported a decrease in health motivation over time. This
ﬁnding is unsurprising given that many individuals initially
adopt health-tracking technologies so that they can set and
make progress towards goals that improve their health. How-
ever, improving one’s health in this manner can be challeng-
ing. Below is a typical post in this category.

“Great Fuelband bought it about a month ago I just don’t
use it enough...”

Posts like this are open to many possible interpretations. It
is possible the seller lost motivation to work out, or the seller
may have lost interest in the device as a motivational tool for
his or her workouts, or the seller may simply not be gaining
enough beneﬁt for the cost of the device.

However, a sale does not necessarily imply the failure of a
particular device to motivate a change in health behavior. In
some cases, the seller was ‘abandoning’ a device but contin-
uing to track their health status through another device. A
common abandonment rationale in this category is “upgrade”
or “owns similar device.” In both of these instances, the seller
is abandoning one health-tracking technology but intends to
use a second health tracker to continue tracking her health.
For example:

“I am selling this because I had the ﬁrst generation
model, and it was broken. After it broke I went and
bought a new one from the store. Then realized my bro-
ken one was still under warranty. Nike sent me a new
one to replace my broken one, so now I have 2...”

Though posts exhibiting an internal increase in health motiva-
tion were relatively rare, these posts are of particular interest
to the designers of mobile health technologies. In the case
of an internal increasing health motivation, typically the in-
dividual has experienced some degree of success with setting
and maintaining goals in the past.

“I’ve had this Fuelband for 4 months... I’m selling be-
cause I need something more suited to triathalon train-
ing.”

The externally motivated examples almost entirely are tied
to either an individuals work/school needs or are linked to a
users gym or workout center.

“Fitbit zip.Got it as a gift, but just got a gym member-
ship, so that’s what I’m tracking...”

The ﬁnal code in this category pertains to the attainment of
goals. Though this code is similar to the “goal met” code

in the Abandonment Rationale category, here, we are specif-
ically interested in the health motivation associated with ac-
complishing or abandoning a health goal.

“This ﬁtbit is in perfect condition...I am no longer count-
ing my steps and actually trying to gain weight so I do
not have use for this anymore.”

Methodological Limitations and Affordances of Craigslist
Gathering data related to the abandonment of personal-
tracking technology proved to be a challenge. Selling a tech-
nology online is a public and visible presentation of abandon-
ing a technology. People also abandon mHealth applications
and personal behavior trackers by simply choosing not to use
those devices over the course of time, however long that may
be. The return on investment of the time and attention re-
quired to create and manage an advertisement on Craigslist
might not be motivation enough to cause an individual to
abandon the technology in the marketplace: it’s quite possi-
ble forgetting the technology is the more attractive decision.
Passive abandonment is certainly simpler than making the ef-
fort to actively actively sell a piece of technology online. On
the other hand, one of the attractions to studying advertise-
ments on Craigslist is that we know these individuals were
intentionally abandoning their health trackers.

With that said,
there are deﬁnitely limitations to using
Craigslist as a data source for abandonment. We assume that
there is a bias towards describing positive aspects of the tech-
nology and minimizing negative details since the user posting
an advertisement is obviously motivated to maximize prof-
its. For example, people most likely downplay the amount
of wear and tear the device has received. We deﬁnitely see
that bias in our data with the only 2.1% of the posts report-
ing that they had owned the technology for a year or more
and only 1.3% of the posts describing moderate usage. An-
other major disadvantage of using Craigslist is the inability
to follow up with sellers to learn more about what they were
selling and why. Without this context to ground the Craigslist
advertisements, the analysis of the data was open to interpre-
tation of the research team. We found ambiguity in a consid-
erable number of posts which made reconstructing individu-
als’ intentions and motivations challenging to say the least.
We were often left without the ability to ﬁgure out what state-
ments like “it’s not for me” means due to limitations in our
methods. Hence the large number of posts labeled as “Vague”
or “Not Reported” in the abandonment point, abandonment
rationale, and health motivation sections.

However, using Craigslist is not without its methodological
advantages. Using Craigslist afforded us wide geographic
coverage and enabled us to avoid self-selection bias and other
limitations of using more traditional qualitative methods to
investigate abandonment. Additionally, the nature of exam-
ining advertisements illuminated certain aspects of the tech-
nology which we might have not observed otherwise. For
example, Technology Condition had the lowest number of
“not reported” values. Describing the condition of the item
for sale on Craigslist is part of the advertising culture on the
site and it often was the catalyst for individuals sharing their

654

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

personal stories online. Learning about the condition of a de-
vice (i.e. new vs. opened vs. used) often provided insight
into the motivation behind the technology acquisition which
in turn taught us things about abandonment that we might not
otherwise have been able to observe.

Finally, both an affordance and a limitation of using Craigslist
is that the data is temporally bound and only represents a brief
snapshot of abandonment practices. For example,Fitbit, Nike
Fuelband, and Jawbone technologies comprise the majority
of technologies in the dataset (89.9%). As such, most of the
reasons we report for abandoning health tracking technolo-
gies refer particularly to these devices. If the data had been
collected at a different time, i.e.
two to three years earlier,
perhaps other technologies would be better represented (such
as Omron pedometers, Omron scales, or Polar heart rate mon-
itors). Though the temporal nature of using Craigslist places
limits on the generalizability of our ﬁndings,(it is entirely
possible that a different set of reasons would be highlighted
had we collected data ﬁve years ago or ﬁve years from now),
it affords a viewpoint into current abandonment practices and
sheds light on societal perceptions towards wearable health
tracking technology. While abandonment practices are con-
stantly changing, our research captures a snapshot of the cur-
rent societal perceptions towards the adoption, use, and aban-
donment of wearable health tracking technology.

DISCUSSION
Recent publications and media reports paint a rather grim pic-
ture regarding wearable technologies and their ability to help
users achieve meaningful goals or enact long-term changes in
their health behaviors [17, 19, 23]. The natural consequence
of the recently published studies documenting the high rate of
abandonment of wearable health technologies by their users
is to question the core functionality of these technologies and
to conclude that either the overall vision for these technolo-
gies is misplaced, their design is deeply ﬂawed, or both. How-
ever, our study shows that reality is more complex than these
initial conclusions imply and that there exist many reasons for
abandoning wearable health technologies that do not imme-
diately reﬂect negatively on their design or their raison d’ˆetre.

Successful Abandonment
In our data, we uncovered multiple dimensions of technology
abandonment. Certainly there are instances where individuals
abandoned their wearable health-tracking technology because
it was too complicated to use, too complex to learn, or be-
cause it failed to help them achieve their goals. However, not
all abandonment was a result of failure in design. Rather, we
uncovered many instances where individuals abandoned their
technology after experiencing success using the technology.

Celebrating “Happy” Abandonment
When examining issues of adoption and abandonment, it is
easy to take a stance that all abandonment signals a failure
of technology. Our study suggests, however, that, at times,
abandonment may indicate that technology has successfully
served its intended purpose and achieved the point of retire-
ment. For example, the desire to upgrade devices to newer
models accounted for about 10% of the abandonment cases

SESSION: ENGAGEMENT AND DISENGAGEMENT

in our dataset. In a world of rapidly changing technologies,
this observation should not be surprising and should signal
a continued, rather than waning interest in self-monitoring.
Schwanda et al. observed instances of “happy” abandonment
when they argue that “The idea that abandonment can be a
marker of success also implies that persuasive systems can be
explicitly designed for this gateway’ effect, planning for the
day when the system will no longer be needed to support new
behaviors.
Instead of seeing persuasive tools as persistent,
permanent companions, persuasive systems designers should
consider whether the systems might play a critical but tempo-
rary role in a gradual change, much as nicotine patches are not
designed for indeﬁnite use.” [40]. Another example of how
technology serves its purpose prior to being abandoned arises
in the cases where individuals achieve their goals. In these
cases, individuals no longer have reasons for self-monitoring
and thus abandon their technology. While this scenario may
be problematic from the perspective of device manufactur-
ers, it may not be so for the customers as they have already
beneﬁted from utilizing these products to achieve their goals.
In both of these abandonment cases, individuals are happily
abandoning their self-monitoring technology as they accom-
plish goals and move on to other activities or devices.

Exploring Social Switching
Another example of successful abandonment is a class of in-
dividuals we termed social switchers. The examples of “so-
cial switching” in the study – cases when individuals de-
cided to switch to a different device because it was preferred
by their friends, family, or colleagues – suggest that health-
monitoring practices often exist within individuals’ social
networks. Understanding an individual’s social environment
and designing software to take advantage of a social network
are relatively new challenges for the designers of wearable
health-tracking technology. We have already seen several ex-
amples where peer inﬂuence played a role in the decision to
abandon a wearable health-tracking technology. While these
instances were rare in our dataset, the importance of social
network effects – particularly peer inﬂuence on adoption and
abandonment – is only beginning to be felt in the wearable
health-tracking domain. Designing compelling social experi-
ences for health-tracking is certainly a health-tracking chal-
lenge today and will continue to be a health-tracking chal-
lenge moving forward.

Designing for Messy Practices
Yet another instance where abandonment of technology may
not signify its failure is when the circumstances dictating its
use and the context of individuals’ lives change. Many of
the Craigslist posts referred to important changes in individ-
uals’ circumstances and the resulting changes in their priori-
ties. New situations a new baby, a new health condition, or
resolution of a previously identiﬁed concern can signiﬁcantly
reduce individuals’ commitment to self-monitoring despite
their initial or ongoing interest. This ﬁnding is consistent
with previous accounts of real-world practices and adoption
of ubiquitous computing technologies. For example, Bell and
Dourish pointed out that the human practices that surround
contemporary ubiquitous technologies are inﬁnitely messier,

655

more dynamic, and less predictable, than the visions of ubiq-
uitous computing generated within research labs [2]. Simi-
larly, Grudin points out the importance of understanding how
technology use in context evolves over time. Speciﬁcally, a
deep understanding of the context associated with the tech-
nology use is essential if we hope to maximize the potential
of the technology [13].

Our study supports these ideas and suggests that self-
monitoring health technologies need to exist within the ever
changing dynamics of individuals’ lives. Health-tracking is
not limited to a speciﬁc subset of users and our ﬁndings high-
light the need to design solutions that embrace a diversity of
users and have the ability to support these users over time.
Our ﬁndings highlights the importance of taking a longitudi-
nal approach to the study of ubiquitous technologies.

Understanding Evolving Use
To further expand on the argument regarding the changing
and dynamic nature of human practices, our data suggest a
complex interplay between these changes and evolution in the
self-monitoring technologies themselves. Previous analysis
of the complex historical trajectories of contemporary tech-
nologies hinted that their development is shaped through the
adoption and use by consumers [3]. Often these trajectories
of use and appropriation unfold in ways unexpected by both
the designers and consumers of technology.

Our study identiﬁed a number of scenarios in which individ-
uals’ understanding of their own needs evolved through their
use of technologies. For example, some of those who started
with FitBit as their ﬁrst choice of self-monitoring technology,
realized they needed a device that was more resistant to wa-
ter (since many of their ﬁtness practices were related to wa-
ter sports and activities). Similarly, a person who decided to
train for a triathlon after purchasing their ﬁrst tracking device
may choose to switch to a new device that supports logging
cycling activity. One post shared that the individual was up-
grading from the Jawbone Up to the Nike Fuelband because
the seller did not want to wear multiple technologies (watch
and ﬁtness tracker). These examples do not necessarily sug-
gest failures of technology, but rather the continuous evolu-
tion of how the self-monitoring technology is perceived by
the consumers and how their evolving needs suggest oppor-
tunities for new design solutions.

Enriching the Theoretical Landscape
Overall, the results of the study identiﬁed a host of rea-
sons why individuals abandon their self-monitoring technolo-
gies, which suggests that human practices related to self-
monitoring are rich, complex, and highly dynamic. As we
argued above, as circumstances of individuals’ lives change,
so do their needs and expectations for self-monitoring. In our
study, mismatch in expectations was identiﬁed as the most
common reason for abandonment. This points to a possible
disconnect between the human practices that emerge around
wearable self-tracking technologies and theories of behavior
change that often provide theoretical foundations for the de-
sign of technologies for health and wellness. Many of these
theories focus on such issues as motivation to engage in self-
management [12], readiness to change one’s health behaviors

[36], and individuals’ perceptions regarding their ability to
succeed in this challenging undertaking [1]. Yet few of these
theories account for the continuous and increasing inﬂux of
data available to individuals with new self-monitoring tech-
nologies. Moreover, these theories take a static view of the
individual, and usually do not account for changes in either an
individual’s own internal state, or in their life circumstances
[37]. Our study suggests a need for more ﬂexible technolo-
gies that could adapt to the changing goals and priorities of
their users. This calls for new ways to conceptualize and theo-
rize about individuals’ health behaviors that take into account
new streams of information, dynamically changing contexts
of use, and rich messy practices that emerge around technolo-
gies for health. For example, Riley et al. suggested incor-
porating a dynamic systems modeling approach to ﬂexibly
adjust the content and dose of health interventions based on
the changing context (individual and environmental). Sim-
ilarly, Mamykina et al. proposed sensemaking as a way of
conceptualizing individuals’ engagement with information in
the context of health and health management [29].

Designing for Evolving Adoption and Continuous Use
In this study our goal was to explore the issues of technol-
ogy adoption and abandonment in all their richness and com-
plexity, without reducing them to a small list of design rec-
ommendations. There are, however, a number of lessons we
learned that suggest more tangible opportunities for new de-
sign solutions that can help to support the evolving adoption
and continuous use of wearable health-tracking technologies.
Below we discuss several concrete design opportunities we
identiﬁed during the study; we hope our ﬁndings will inspire a
continuing discussion within the HCI and UbiComp commu-
nities as to the future trajectory of wearable self-monitoring
technologies.

1. Self-monitoring as a means to an end - Many of the orig-
inal self-monitoring technologies focused on data collec-
tion, leaving it up to their users to utilize the data in any
way they saw ﬁt. New applications, however, are beginning
to view self-monitoring not as a goal in itself, but rather as
a means to some end, a way to achieve a certain goal. Our
study suggested, however, that these goals vary greatly be-
tween individuals. Some of these are concerned with eating
habits, some with weight loss, some with increased physi-
cal ﬁtness. Moreover, these goals are likely to change and
evolve as individuals make (or fail to make) progress to-
wards them. We propose that new self-monitoring tech-
nologies further embrace goals as a motivator to engage in
data collection; however, we suggest that the applications
should support a wide variety of these goals, and help their
users to re-assess and re-evaluate them when necessary.
2. From self-monitoring to personal analytics - Further, we
propose that self-monitoring technologies increase their fo-
cus on the analysis of data they collect and provide more
extensive personal analytics features. Most of the technolo-
gies available today focus on data collection, and usually
present their users with a historical log of captured data.
However, many previous studies of individuals’ learning in
health and wellness suggest that dependencies and correla-
tions in the data are more important and more difﬁcult to

656

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

identify than simple historical records [28, 31]. Moreover,
the focus of such analytics could be not only on the pat-
terns of dependencies in the captured data, but also on the
evolving patterns of the technology use. We propose that
personal self-monitoring technologies incorporate more ro-
bust analytical engines that can help individuals notice and
test these dependencies.

3. Beyond individual - Our study suggested that self-
monitoring technologies often exist within individuals’ so-
cial networks and as part of individuals’ social practices.
Yet many of these devices provide only a limited set of
features for individuals to share their data with others and
to subscribe to other individuals’ records. These new abil-
ities, however, could help to promote such important phe-
nomena as social and observational learning and allow in-
dividuals to provide encouragement and motivation, thus
contributing to continuous and sustained engagement.

CONCLUSION
Personal health-tracking technologies have been rapidly
adopted into mainstream culture and have sparked an explo-
sion of interest in self-monitoring. While there has been
a lot of recent research investigating the use of these self-
monitoring technologies for health and behavior change in-
terventions, the adoption, use, and particularly abandonment
of these technologies in everyday life is relatively unexplored.
We conducted an investigation into the abandonment of per-
sonal health-tracking technologies collecting almost 1600 on-
line classiﬁed advertisements. We conducted iterative induc-
tive and deductive analyses of these advertisements, and un-
covered a set of themes around the acquisition, usage, and
abandonment of personal health-tracking technologies.

Our study uncovered that in many cases, abandonment does
not necessarily reﬂect individuals’ dissatisfaction with tech-
nology. Many individuals were selling their old devices be-
cause they achieved their goals or were upgrading to newer
models, scenarios that indicate success, rather than failure of
technologies. Others were selling devices because of unantic-
ipated changes in their life circumstances that led to changes
in their priorities and abilities, for example a surgery, or the
birth of a child. These cases, while difﬁcult to predict, suggest
that self-monitoring technologies are often integrated within
complex, messy, and dynamically changing human practices.
Understanding the context of their use can help designers
identify potential use trajectories and design for evolving
adoption. However, over a quarter of all devices in the study
were abandoned due to a mismatch between users’ hopes and
expectations and device capabilities. This suggests a need for
new theoretically-grounded approaches for engaging individ-
uals in the analysis of data collected through self-monitoring
that can lead to discovery, insight, and, as a result, improved
health.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Institute
of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease (NIDDK)
grant, 5R01DK090372 and the National Library of Medicine
(NLM) grant T15LM007442.

SESSION: ENGAGEMENT AND DISENGAGEMENT

REFERENCES
1. Bandura, A. Health promotion by social cognitive

means. Health Education & Behavior 31, 2 (2004),
143–164.

2. Bell, G., and Dourish, P. Yesterday&#x2019;s

tomorrows: Notes on ubiquitous computing&#x2019;s
dominant vision. Personal Ubiquitous Comput. 11, 2
(Jan. 2007), 133–143.

3. Bijker, W. E. Of Bicycles,Bakelites and Bulbs: Toward a
Theory of Sociotechnical Change. MIT Press, 1995,
ch. 1-2.

4. Chen, Z., Lin, M., Chen, F., Lane, N. D., Cardone, G.,

Wang, R., Li, T., Chen, Y., Choudhury, T., and
Campbell, A. T. Unobtrusive sleep monitoring using
smartphones. In Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for
Healthcare, PervasiveHealth ’13, ICST (Institute for
Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and
Telecommunications Engineering) (ICST, Brussels,
Belgium, Belgium, 2013), 145–152.

5. Choe, E. K., Consolvo, S., Watson, N. F., and Kientz,
J. A. Opportunities for computing technologies to
support healthy sleep behaviors. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’11, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2011),
3053–3062.

6. Choe, E. K., Lee, N. B., Lee, B., Pratt, W., and Kientz,
J. A. Understanding quantiﬁed-selfers’ practices in
collecting and exploring personal data. In Proceedings
of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI ’14, ACM (New York, NY,
USA, 2014), 1143–1152.

7. Consolvo, S., Everitt, K., Smith, I., and Landay, J. A.
Design requirements for technologies that encourage
physical activity. CHI ’06, ACM (New York, NY, USA,
2006), 457–466.

8. Cordeiro, F., Epstein, D. A., Thomaz, E., Bales, E.,
Jagannathan, A. K., Abowd, G. D., and Fogarty, J.
Barriers and negative nudges: Exploring challenges in
food journaling. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’15, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2015),
1159–1162.

9. Fritz, T., Huang, E. M., Murphy, G. C., and

Zimmermann, T. Persuasive technology in the real
world: A study of long-term use of activity sensing
devices for ﬁtness. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
CHI ’14, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2014), 487–496.

10. Froehlich, J., Findlater, L., and Landay, J. The design of
eco-feedback technology. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
CHI ’10, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2010),
1999–2008.

11. Glanz, K., Rimer, B., and Viswanath, K. Health

Behavior and Health Education: Theory, Research, and
Practice. Wiley, 2008.

12. Godin, G., and Kok, G. The theory of planned behavior:
A review of its applications to health-related behaviors.
American Journal of Health Promotion 11, 2 (1996),
87–98.

13. Grudin, J. Why cscw applications fail: Problems in the
design and evaluationof organizational interfaces. In
Proceedings of the 1988 ACM Conference on
Computer-supported Cooperative Work, CSCW ’88,
ACM (New York, NY, USA, 1988), 85–93.

14. Guo, F., Li, Y., Kankanhalli, M. S., and Brown, M. S.

An evaluation of wearable activity monitoring devices.
In Proceedings of the 1st ACM International Workshop
on Personal Data Meets Distributed Multimedia, PDM
’13, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2013), 31–34.

15. Hammond, T. Wearables have a dirty little secret: 50%
of users lose interest. Tech Republic Inc. (2014).

16. Hekler, E. B., Klasnja, P., Froehlich, J. E., and Buman,
M. P. Mind the theoretical gap: Interpreting, using, and
developing behavioral theory in hci research. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’13, ACM (New
York, NY, USA, 2013), 3307–3316.

17. Herz, J. Wearables are totally failing the people who

need them most. Wired (November 2014).

18. Hodges, S., Williams, L., Berry, E., Izadi, S., Srinivasan,
J., Butler, A., Smyth, G., Kapur, N., and Wood, K.
Sensecam: A retrospective memory aid. In UbiComp
2006: Ubiquitous Computing. Springer, 2006, 177–193.

19. Hunter, L. Are wearables over? Fast Company Inc.

(2014).

20. IDTechEx. Wearable technology 2014-2024:

Technologies, markets, forecasts e-textiles, wearable
electronics, medical diagnostics, smart glasses, smart
wristbands and more, July 2014.
http://www.idtechex.com/research/reports/
wearable-technology-2014-2024-technologies\
-markets-forecasts-000379.asp.

21. Kay, M., Choe, E. K., Shepherd, J., Greenstein, B.,

Watson, N., Consolvo, S., and Kientz, J. A. Lullaby: A
capture &#38; access system for understanding the sleep
environment. In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, UbiComp ’12,
ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2012), 226–234.

22. Klasnja, P., and Pratt, W. Healthcare in the pocket:

Mapping the space of mobile-phone health
interventions. J. of Biomedical Informatics 45, 1 (Feb.
2012), 184–198.

23. Ledger, D., and McCaffrey, D. Inside wearables: How
the science of human behavior change offers the secret
to long-term engagement. Endeavour Partners, LLC 93,
1 (2014), 36–45.

657

24. Lee, V. R., and Drake, J. Quantiﬁed recess: Design of an
activity for elementary students involving analyses of
their own movement data. In Proceedings of the 12th
International Conference on Interaction Design and
Children, IDC ’13, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2013),
273–276.

25. Li, I., Dey, A., and Forlizzi, J. A stage-based model of
personal informatics systems. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, CHI ’10, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2010),
557–566.

26. Li, I., Dey, A. K., and Forlizzi, J. Understanding my

data, myself: Supporting self-reﬂection with ubicomp
technologies. In Proceedings of the 13th International
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, UbiComp ’11,
ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2011), 405–414.

27. Lin, J. J., Mamykina, L., Lindtner, S., Delajoux, G., and
Strub, H. B. Fish’n’steps: Encouraging physical activity
with an interactive computer game. In Proceedings of
the 8th International Conference on Ubiquitous
Computing, UbiComp’06, Springer-Verlag (Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2006), 261–278.

28. Mamykina, L., Mynatt, E., Davidson, P., and Greenblatt,
D. Mahi: investigation of social scaffolding for reﬂective
thinking in diabetes management. CHI ’08, ACM (New
York, NY, USA, 2008), 477–486.

29. Mamykina, L., Smaldone, A. M., and Bakken, S. R.

Adopting the sensemaking perspective for chronic
disease self-management. Journal of Biomedical
Informatics In Print (2015), –.

30. Mauriello, M., Gubbels, M., and Froehlich, J. E. Social
fabric ﬁtness: The design and evaluation of wearable
e-textile displays to support group running. In
Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’14, ACM
(New York, NY, USA, 2014), 2833–2842.

31. Medynskiy, Y., and Mynatt, E. D. Salud!: An open
infrastructure for developing and deploying health
self-management applications. In PervasiveHealth,
IEEE (2010), 1–8.

32. Miller, A. D., and Mynatt, E. D. Stepstream: A
school-based pervasive social ﬁtness system for
everyday adolescent health. In Proceedings of the 32Nd
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI ’14, ACM (New York, NY,
USA, 2014), 2823–2832.

33. Munson, S., and Consolvo, S. Exploring goal-setting,
rewards, self-monitoring, and sharing to motivate
physical activity. In Pervasive Computing Technologies
for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2012 6th
International Conference on (May 2012), 25–32.

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

34. Patel, R. A., Klasnja, P. V., Hartzler, A., Unruh, K. T.,
and Pratt, W. Probing the beneﬁts of real-time tracking
during cancer care. In AMIA (2012).

35. Phillips, B., and Zhao, H. Faculty adoption of

educational technology. Assistive Technology 5, 1
(1993), 36–45.

36. Prochaska, J., and Velicer, W. F. The Transtheoretical

Model of Health Behavior Change. American Journal of
Health Promotion 12, 1 (1997), 38–48.

37. Riley, W. T., Rivera, D. E., Atienza, A. A., Nilsen, W.,
Allison, S. M., and Mermelstein, R. Health behavior
models in the age of mobile interventions: are our
theories up to the task? Translational behavioral
medicine 1, 1 (2011), 53–71.

38. Rooksby, J., Rost, M., Morrison, A., and Chalmers,
M. C. Personal tracking as lived informatics. In
Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’14, ACM
(New York, NY, USA, 2014), 1163–1172.

39. Sahami Shirazi, A., Clawson, J., Hassanpour, Y.,

Tourian, M. J., Schmidt, A., Chi, E. H., Borazio, M., and
Van Laerhoven, K. Already up? using mobile phones to
track & share sleep behavior. Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud.
71, 9 (Sept. 2013), 878–888.

40. Schwanda, V., Ibara, S., Reynolds, L., and Cosley, D.

Side effects and ”gateway” tools: Advocating a broader
look at evaluating persuasive systems. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI ’11, ACM (New York, NY,
USA, 2011), 345–348.

41. Strecher, V. J., Seijts, G. H., Kok, G. J., Latham, G. P.,

Glasgow, R., DeVellis, B., Meertens, R. M., and Bulger,
D. W. Goal setting as a strategy for health behavior
change. Health Education & Behavior 22, 2 (1995),
190–200.

42. Swan, M. Emerging patient-driven health care models:
An examination of health social networks, consumer
personalized medicine and quantiﬁed self-tracking.
International Journal of Environmental Research and
Public Health 6, 2 (2009), 492–525.

43. Van Laerhoven, K., and Aronsen, A. Memorizing what
you did last week: Towards detailed actigraphy with a
wearable sensor. In Distributed Computing Systems
Workshops, 2007. ICDCSW ’07. 27th International
Conference on (June 2007), 47–47.

44. Walsh, G., and Golbeck, J. Stepcity: A preliminary
investigation of a personal informatics-based social
game on behavior change. In CHI ’14 Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI
EA ’14, ACM (New York, NY, USA, 2014), 2371–2376.

658

