

One Step Forward, Two Steps Back: The Key to 
Wearables in the Field is the App 

Bliss Altenhoff, Haley Vaigneur and Kelly Caine 
Department of Psychology, Department of Industrial Engineering, School of Computing 
Clemson University 
Clemson, United States 
{blissw, hvagine, caine} @clemson.edu  

Abstract—Wearable  trackers  and  sensors  are  becoming  an 
increasingly  popular  option  for  people  to  manage  their  health 
and  fitness  and  for  physicians  to  monitor  patients  with  chronic 
illnesses. Consumer wearables such as the Jawbone UP and Fitbit 
Flex  empower  people  to  change  habits  that  may  help  prevent 
health  problems.  The  success  of  wearables  depends  on  their 
perceived  ease  of  use  and  how  successfully  users  are  able  to 
incorporate  them  into  their  lives  over  the  long  term.  We 
conducted  a  usability  test  and  field  study  with  fourteen  users 
comparing  two  consumer  wearable  devices.  While  participants 
rated  the  aesthetic  design  of  the  Jawbone  UP24  higher,  they 
rated  app  characteristics  such  as  usefulness  and  trust  in  data 
generated  of  the  Fitbit  Flex  app  higher.  These  findings  suggest 
that  while  wearable  technologies  are  advancing  in  capabilities, 
their  acceptance  and  satisfaction  may  depend  on  the  quality  of 
the app, in addition to the qualities of the wearable device itself.

Keywords—wearable  computing;  quantified  self;  preventive 

healthcare; mobile app design 

I.

INTRODUCTION

As health care initiatives and societal trends have begun to 
encourage healthier lifestyles, technology has met the demand 
in  the  form  of  “wearables”.  Wearables  aim  to  seamlessly 
incorporate  technology  into  everyday  life  in  an  easy  to  wear 
format.  Consumers  can  use  the  devices  to  look  at  trends  to 
identify what makes them feel good, and to identify when they 
are  deviating  from  specific  fitness  goals.  These  devices  have 
become popular, in part, because they offer solutions for those 
wishing to prevent, diagnose, and manage diseases. Although 
the  possible  applications  for  wearable  tracking  devices  are 
immense,  examples  include  occasional  use  by  wellness  or 
fitness  tracking  users  to  continuous  use  by  chronically  ill 
inpatients or outpatients and their physicians. In the healthcare 
setting,  wearables  can  be  used  to  continuously  sense  a 
patient’s physiological data, such as heart rate, blood pressure, 
etc., to quickly alert a physician when necessary. For example, 
diabetic  patients  can  wear  a  blood  glucose  sensor  that 
communicates readings directly to the patient or physician [4, 
12, 13]. 

With  a  recent 

improvement  of 
increased  focus  on 
electronic  health  records  (EHRs),  efficient  data  collection  is 
necessary 
the  success  of  meeting  government-set 
initiatives and improving patient safety. Data from wearables 

for 

could  be  used  to  populate  an  individual’s  EHR  [14],  supply 
rich  information  from  a  large  sample  to  decision  support 
systems to guide physicians, and predict or alert physicians or 
users when aid is needed. Rather than monitoring all patients, 
wearable  sensors  could  allow  health  care  providers  to  offer 
more  effective  and  efficient  care,  providing  real-time 
feedback, and reduce costs of services [3, 17].  

More  recently,  wearables  have  evolved  to  attract  a 
healthier  population.  Factors  such  as  social  networking, 
personal  fitness  awareness,  smartphones,  and  gamification, 
have created a market for wearables as activity trackers [10]. 
It  has  been  estimated  that  80  million  fitness  monitoring 
devices  will  be  sold  by  2016  [18].  As  observed  at  the  2014 
Consumer  Electronics  Show,  wearables  are  quickly  growing 
in  popularity  [1],  with  one  in  ten  Americans  now  owning  an 
activity tracker of their own [9]. 

Wearables  also  have  the  potential  to  significantly  reduce 
medical costs and improve healthy habits of its users as a tool 
for  preventative  care.  In  2008,  the  estimated  annual  medical 
costs  for  people  who  are  obese  was  $147  billion,  $1,429 
higher per person than those of normal weight. With one-third 
of the population qualifying as obese, and about two-thirds as 
overweight [2], consumer wearables such as the Jawbone UP, 
Fitbit,  and  Nike  FuelBand  are  helping  individuals  track  and 
quantify  their  physical  activity  to  reach  healthier  lifestyle 
goals. By measuring diet, sleep, and fitness performance, users 
can more easily identify and quantify areas for improvement, 
using the wearable as a teaching aid [6]. 

A. Purpose and Goals 

The  need  for  healthier  lifestyles  combined  with  the 
quantified-self  movement,  which  uses  technologies  to  track 
and  measure  personal  health  metrics  (sleep,  diet,  exercise, 
stress,  etc.)  [15],  has  motivated  many  companies  to  develop 
wearable  trackers.  However,  while  research  on  development 
and design of wearable devices has been increasing in recent 
years, the emphasis has been on functionalities [8], design of 
the  form  factor,  [16]  and  increasing  accessibility  [11]  rather 
than better understanding consumers’ abilities to correctly and 
effortlessly use such meaningful technologies.  

(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:20)

(cid:28)(cid:26)(cid:27)(cid:16)(cid:20)(cid:16)(cid:25)(cid:22)(cid:20)(cid:28)(cid:19)(cid:16)(cid:19)(cid:23)(cid:24)(cid:16)(cid:26)(cid:3)(cid:107)(cid:3)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:3)(cid:44)(cid:38)(cid:54)(cid:55)
(cid:39)(cid:50)(cid:44)(cid:3)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:23)(cid:20)(cid:19)(cid:27)(cid:18)(cid:76)(cid:70)(cid:86)(cid:87)(cid:17)(cid:83)(cid:72)(cid:85)(cid:89)(cid:68)(cid:86)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:72)(cid:75)(cid:72)(cid:68)(cid:79)(cid:87)(cid:75)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:19)(cid:20)(cid:24)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:24)(cid:28)(cid:19)(cid:23)(cid:28)

Many  activity  tracking  wearables  available  to  consumers 
require  the  use  of  a  mobile  app  for  viewing  data,  additional 
tracking,  and  personalization.  Perhaps  because  of  the  recent 
emphasis on development of wearable devices, resources may 
have not been adequately allocated to the research and design 
of  the  accompanying  mobile  app.  In  the  current  study  we 
examine  the  usability  of  the  Fitbit  Flex  and  Jawbone  UP24 
wearable  bands  and  accompanying  mobile  apps,  which  were 
the two of the most popular and similar devices on the market 
at the time of this study, with the most units sold in 2013 [5]. 
By selecting two devices quite homogeneous in price, device 
design, and functionalities, any differences in the usability or 
user  experience  could  then  likely  be  attributed  to  app  design 
differences  rather  than  functionality.  With  one  third  of 
wearable consumers forgoing the device within six months of 
purchase  [9],  we  sought  to  investigate  how  the  app  may 
influence  initial  impressions,  which  may  possibly  influence 
future behavior.  

B. Technologies 

The Jawbone UP24 is a wristband activity tracker that uses 
accelerometers to automatically track steps walked during the 
day  and  amount  and  quality  of  sleep  at  night.  Using  the 
Jawbone  UP  smartphone  app,  users  can  view  their  tracked 
data,  which  is  synced  wirelessly  via  Bluetooth,  and  record 
additional information about diet, mood, workouts, and trends. 
They can also use the device to provide an idle alert
if  they  want  to  be  reminded  to  remain  physically  active 
throughout the day, wake them up in the morning based on the 
optimal  time  in  their  sleep  cycle,  or  even  set  a  power  nap 
alarm. The only display on the band is the sleep/awake status 
lights.  As  seen  in  Figure  1,  a  moon  icon  will  light  up  to 
indicate  sleep  mode,  and  a  sun  icon  will  light  up  to  indicate 
day mode.  

Fig. 2. Fitbit Flex band and app 

II. METHODS

A  mixed-methods  study  was  conducted 

to  evaluate 
wearable trackers and their apps. We engaged users in both a 
think-aloud usabilty test and  a three day field study. 

A. Participants 

Participants  were  eight  women  and  six  men  (N  =  14), 
between the ages of 22 and 54 years old, and were randomly 
assigned to either the Fitbit Flex group (mean age 29.8 years, 
4 females, 3 males) or the Jawbone UP group (mean age 24.2, 
4  females,  3  males).  All  participants  were  English  speaking 
and 
iPhone,  Android,  or  Windows  smartphone  users. 
Participants had no previous experience with wearables.

B. Procedure 

Participants  were  first  introduced  to  the  band  and  app 
through  a  think  aloud  usability  test,  interacting  with  main 
features such as setting up the app for the first time, setting the 
alarm,  and  logging  diet  and  workout.  Participants  then 
completed a field study where they wore the Fitbit or Jawbone 
for  three  days,  incorporating  it  into  their  everyday  life  as  if 
they  bought  it  for  themselves.  They were  asked  to behave as 
they  wished,  using  the  device  as  much  or  as  little  as  they 
preferred.  Finally,  after  wearing  the  device  and  using  the 
mobile  app  for  three  days,  participants  completed  a  post-test 
survey 
their  overall  experience  and  an 
unstructured interview where they discussed their experiences 
while using the technology in the field. 

that  queried 

Fig. 1. Jawbone UP24 band and app home screen. 

The Fitbit Flex is an activity and sleep tracking wristband. 
Data collected can be synced wirelessly to an iOS or Android 
smartphone or a computer (via a dongle) with Bluetooth 4.0. It 
tracks  steps  taken,  distance  traveled,  calories  burned,  active 
minutes,  hours  slept,  and  quality  of  sleep.  The  Flex  shows 
daily progress on the wristband with LED lights and vibration, 
and shows statistics through charts and tables once the data is 
synced.  Additional  features  include  silent  alarms,  waterproof 
design,  and  sharing  with  other  health  and  social  apps.  A 
picture of the device and the app software is shown in Figure 
2.  

III. RESULTS

Results are organized by usability study and field study. 

A. Usability Evaluation 

During  the  think-aloud  usability  test  time-on-task  and 
errors  were  recorded  (see  Table  1),  as  well  as  participant 
comments. Findings are organized by task. 

1) Time on Task: It took participants more time overall to 
complete the tasks while using the Jawbone UP (M = 3.67 SD 
=  3.15)  than  the  Fitbit  Flex  (M  =  2.13;  SD  =  2.25),  t(36)  = 
2.36, p = .022. 

(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:21)

TABLE I. 

TIME ON TASK, NUMBER OF STEPS, AND SECONDS TAKEN PER STEP FOR EACH TASK IN THE MOBILE APP USABILITY TEST

Metric 

Device 

Average Errors 

Average Time  (min) 

Seconds/Step 

Fitbit Flex 
Jawbone Up 
Fitbit Flex 
Jawbone Up 
Fitbit Flex 

Jawbone Up 

1. Setup 
0.3 
1
6.1 
9.2 
52 

26 

Task 

3. Alarm 
0
3
0.6 
2.5 
13 

25 

2. Diet 
0.4 
1.1 
1.5 
3.7 
23 

37 

4.Workout 
0.1 
2.3 
1.2 
2 
18 

20 

2) Number of Steps: It took participants the same number 
of steps overall to complete the tasks while using the Jawbone 
UP  (M  =9.2;  SD  =  6.8)  and  the  Fitbit  Flex  (M  =  4.2;  SD  = 
1.6), t(36) = 1.59, p = .187. 

3) Errors:  Participants  experienced  more  errors  with  the 
Jawbone tasks (M=1.5, SD=1.6) than with the Fitbit Flex (M = 
0.4, SD = 0.7), t(36) = 3.42, p = 0.002. 

B. Observations and Participant Comments 

1) Setup:  This  task  had  the  highest  number  of  steps  and 
time  on  task  for  both  the  Jawbone  Up  and  the  Fitbit  Flex. 
While the longer time can be attributed to taking more steps, 
this was also the participants’ first interaction with the device, 
and  the  participants  worked  faster  as  they  became  more 
familiar  with  their  respective  devices.  Participants  also  had 
trouble  physically  activating 
the  devices.  A  Jawbone 
participant  stated  “I’m  not  sure  what  button  to  push  to  wake 
up  the  band”.  Fitbit  users  found  that  the  instructions  did  not 
accurately  depict  where  or  how  hard  to  tap  the  band  and 
multiple participants expressed “I don’t think this is the right 
spot, and I don’t want to push too hard and break it.” 

2) Diet: Jawbone  UP  participants  struggled  more  than 
Fitbit Flex participants to log diet. Nine out of fourteen of the 
participants had experience with some kind of health logging 
app, possibly making this task seem more intuitive. However, 
a  Fitbit  participant  realized  that  there  was  not  an  option  to 
input  decimal  amounts  (e.g.  10.5  ounces  water),  only  whole 
numbers. One of the Jawbone errors was due to the participant 
losing 
the  food  menu 
completely when trying to reverse a single food.”

log:  “I  accidently  closed 

their 

3) Alarm: Several  of  the  Jawbone  Up  participants  had 
trouble  locating  and  understanding  the  alarm.  Although 
accessible  through  the  band  icon  in  the  top  right  corner,  two 
wanted  to  go  to  sleep  information,  and  one  expressed  they 
thought  it  would  be  under  settings.  Another  participant  was 
also  confused  about  the  “smart  sleep”  setting:  “So,  it  says  a 
smart  alarm  wakes  me  up  when  I’m  in  light  sleep  within  30 
minutes,  but  is  that  before  or  after?”    While  the  Fitbit  Flex 
alarm function was also under the accounts tab, which could 

(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:22)

have  presented  confusion  like  the  goals,  participants  did  not 
have  trouble  with  this  task  because  they  saw  the  function 
when setting the goals, and knew exactly where to go.

4) Workout: This task was more straightforward for those 
with  the  Fitbit.  A  Jawbone  participant  stated  “I  would  go  to 
the  right  menu  because  it  looks  like  where  you  input  data”. 
The  Fitbit  participants  easily  went  to  the  “active  minutes” 
section  and  searched  for  their  exercise  and  selected  the 
amount.

C. Field Study 

After using the wearable device in the field for three days, 
participants were asked to rate their satisfaction with the band 
and  app.  For  example,  “How  useful  did  you  perceive  the 
Jawbone UP/Fitbit Flex to be on a scale of 1 to 5 with 1 being 
not at all useful and 5 being extremely useful?” 

Overall,  participants  assigned  to  the  Jawbone  Up  rated  it 
higher than those assigned to the Fitbit in terms of aesthetics 
t(10) = 2.34, p = 0.04 and lower in terms of usefulness, burden 
and  trust  (see  Figure  3),  though  these  tests  were  non-
significant (p’s >.05). 

g
n
i
t
a
R

n
a
e
M

(cid:887)

(cid:886)

(cid:885)

(cid:884)

(cid:883)

(cid:13)(cid:131)(cid:153)(cid:132)(cid:145)(cid:144)(cid:135)(cid:3)(cid:24)(cid:19)

(cid:9)(cid:139)(cid:150)(cid:132)(cid:139)(cid:150)(cid:3)(cid:9)(cid:142)(cid:135)(cid:154)

Fig. 3. Mean ratings after using device for three days 

IV. DISCUSSION

Overall, participants using the Fitbit were able to complete 
the  usability  test  faster  and  with  fewer  errors  and  had  more 
positive  statements  about  their  experience  at  the  end  of  the 
three  days  relative  to  those  using  the  Jawbone,  despite  its 
lower aesthetic ratings. Issues encountered during the usability 

 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This  material  is  based  upon  work  supported  by  the  National 
Science Foundation under Grant No. 1314342. Any opinions, 
findings,  and  conclusions  or  recommendations  expressed  in 
this material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. 

REFERENCES

[1] T.  Bradshaw,  “CES  2014:  Wearables  emerge  as  top  trend,”  Financial 

http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/50264574-7485-11e3-9125-

Times
00144feabdc0.html#axzz2wKolfTIb

[2] Center  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.  Adult  obesity  facts,  2012. 

http://www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/adult.html

[3] Center  for  Disease  Control  and  Prevention.  “CDC’s  vision  for  public 
health surveillance in the 21st century,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly 
Report, vol. 61, 2012. 

[4] T.  Fritz,  E.  M.  Huang,  G.  C.  Murphy,  and  G.  C.  Zimmermann, 
“Persuasive  technology  in  the  real  world:  A  study  of  long-term  use  of 
activity sensing devices for fitness,” Proc CHI’14, , pp. 487-496, 2014.

[5] A.  Hsiao.  “Terapeak  trends:  Fitbit,  Nike  top  the  market  for  activity 
trakers,”  2013.  http://www.terapeak.com/blog/2013/07/31/fitbit-nike-
top-the-market-for-activity-trackers/#.VKsTJUvUpqa 

[6] E.  B.  Hekler,  P.  Klasnja,  V.  Traver,  and  M.  Hendriks,  “Realizing 
effective behavioral management of health,” IEEE Pulse, vol. 4, pp. 29-
45, 2013. 
 J. Knight, H. Bristow, S. Anastopoulou, C. Baber, A. Schwirtz, and T. 
Arvanitis,  “Uses  of  accelerometer  data  collected  from  a  wearable 
system,” Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 11,  2007.  

[7]

[8] O.  D.  Lara,  and  M.  A.  Labrador,  “A  survey  on  human  activity 
recognition using wearable sensors,” IEEE Comm Surveys & Tutorials, 
vol. 15, pp. 1192-1209, 2013. 

[9] D.  Ledger,  and  D.  McCaffrey,  “Inside  wearables:  How  the  science  of 
human  behavior  change  offers  the  secret  to  long-term  engagement,” 
Endeavour Partners, 2014. 

[10] M.  J.  McGrath,  and  C.  N.  Scanalli,  “Wellness,  fitness,  and  lifestyle 

sensing applications,” Sensor Technologies, pp. 217-248, 2013. 

[11] G. Ngai, S. C. F. Chan, V. T. Y. Ng, J. C. Y. Cheung, S. S. S. Choy, W. 
W. Y. Lau, and J. T. P. Tse, “i•CATch: a scalable plug-n-play wearable 
computing framework for novices and children,” Pro CHI pp. 443-452, 
2010.

[12] M. L. Resnick, “Ubiquitous computing: UX when there is no UI,” Proc 

HFES, pp.1007-1011, 2013. 

[13] J. Rooksby, M. Rost, A. Morrison, and M. Chalmers, “Personal tracking 
as lived informatics,” Proc. CHI ’14, ACM, pp. 1163-1172, 2014. 
[14]  J.  Sorber,  M.  Shin,  R.  Peterson,  and  D.  Kotz,  “Plug-n-Trust:  Practical 
Trusted  Sensing  for  mHealth,”  Proceedings  MobiSys,  pp.  309-322, 
2012.  

[15] M. Swan, “Emerging patient-driven health care models: An examination 
of  health  social  networks,  consumer  personalized  medicine  and 
International  Journal  of  Environmental 
quantified  self-tracking,” 
Research and Public health, vol. 6, pp.  492-525, 2009. 

[16] A.  Teller,  “A  platform  for  wearable  physiological  computing,” 

Interacting with Computers, vol. 16, pp. 917-937, 2004. 

[17] A. Pantelopoulos, and N. G. A. Bourbakis, “Survey on wearable sensor-
based  systems  for  health  monitoring  prognosis,”  IEEE  Trans  on 
Systems,  Man,  and  Cybernetics  –  Part  C:  Applications  and  Reviews, 
vol. 40, pp. 1-12, 2010. 

[18] J. Zheng, Y. Shen, Z. Zhang, T. Wu, G. Zhang, and H. Lu, “Emerging 
wearable  medical  devices towards personalized healthcare,”  Proc Body 
Area Networks, pp. 427-431, 2013. 

test  as  well  as  participant  statements  tended  to  focus  on 
interactions  with  the  app  rather  than  the  band.  It  is  possible 
that if users do not believe the wearable device and app to be 
useful enough, trust the data presented, and find it to be little 
burden, they may decrease usage over time [9]. Interviews at 
the  end  of  the three days  indicate  that  participant  trust  in  the 
data  provided  by  the  wearable  was  influenced  by  the  first 
experiences  with  the  app,  and  those  beliefs  rarely  seemed  to 
change  across  the  three  days.  For  example,  one  Jawbone 
participant reported not trusting sleep data after the first night 
when  it  did  not  accurately  report  the  time  he  fell  asleep. 
Another participant was surprised when upon first syncing the 
band and app, the app displayed about 80 steps before she had 
taken  any  actual  steps,  commenting  on  day  3,  “I  feel  like  I 
would  just  use  it  when  working  out  to  figure  out  what  I’d 
actually  done  and  for  sleep  but  not  walking  because  it’s  not 
accurate.”  Another  Jawbone  participant  mentioned 
that 
“Certain  aspects  were  a  burden,  so  if  they  were  then  I  just 
wouldn’t do them – like the food.” Although the current study 
only spanned three days, some Jawbone participants reported 
decreased usage over the short period of time, suggesting that 
initial impressions of the app may have lasting effects on user 
engagement. 

V. RECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSION

As mobile phones continue to be a popular and promising 
platform  for  users  to  access  health  tracking  data  because  of 
their ability to support Internet access, automated sensing, text 
messaging,  and  journaling  [7],  wearables’  accompanying 
mobile  apps  should  be  used  to  maximize  benefits  of  the 
wearable.  Though  the  Fitbit  Flex  and  Jawbone  UP  offer  the 
same  features  through  a  wearable  wristband  and  phone  app, 
the  physical  comfort  and  superior  usability  of  the  Fitbit  Flex 
app  appear  to  contribute  to  higher  subjective  ratings  of 
usefulness and trust in data generated, despite the higher rated 
aesthetic design of the Jawbone UP. This finding suggests that 
the  app  design  can  strongly  influence  the  overall  satisfaction 
and acceptance of the wearable, as a whole. Although one in 
ten  Americans  owns  a  wearable  device,  half  no  longer  use  it 
and  one-third  stop  using  the  device  within  the  first  6  months 
[9].  It  is  possible  that  these  user-interface  issues  may 
contribute to the declining user interest over time, if they feel 
that 
inaccurate. 
Especially  if  first  impressions  of  the  app  influence  overall 
opinions  of  the  wearable,  future  designs  should  ensure  they 
support  the  user,  from  the  first  interaction  with  a  focus  on 
effort  of  use,  and  perceived  accuracy  of  data  and  how  they 
contribute  to  this  lack  of  long-term  engagement.  These 
the 
findings  are 
importance of not only creating easy to use wearables, but also 
the  importance  of  supporting  technologies  such  as  apps. 
Future 
in 
further 
satisfaction  and  engagement  over  a  longer  period  of  time  to 
fully understand adoption. 

is  burdensome  or 

investigate  change 

important  because 

they  demonstrate 

research  should 

their  data 

tracking 

(cid:21)(cid:23)(cid:23)

