Opportunities for Oral Health Monitoring 
Technologies Beyond the Dental Clinic 

Adele Parsons 
Human Centered Design and Engineering 
University of Washington 
Seattle Washington U.S. 
adelepa@uw.edu 

Chia-Fang Chung 
Human Centered Design and Engineering 
University of Washington 
Seattle Washington U.S. 
cfchung@uw.edu 

Molly Donohue 
Human Centered Design and Engineering 
University of Washington 
Seattle Washington U.S. 
donoh95@uw.edu 

Sean A. Munson 
Human Centered Design and Engineering 
University of Washington 
Seattle Washington U.S. 
smunson@uw.edu 

Eric J. Seibel 
Mechanical Engineering 
University of Washington 
Seattle Washington U.S. 
eseibel@uw.edu 

ABSTRACT 
Personal  health  and  wellness  technologies  can  improve 
people’s  care  at  home,  connect  everyday  activities  to 
clinical  settings,  and  allow  more  efficient  use  of  clinical 
resources.  Recently, 
the  Human-Computer  Interaction 
community has begun to develop tools to improve oral care. 
In  this  research,  we  investigate  dental  practices  and 
information  needs  through  surveys  and  interviews  with  a 
range  of  patients  and  oral  health  providers.  We  find  that 
personal  users  want  to  track  their  progress—or  lack 
thereof—between  dental  visits  for  feedback,  so  they  can 
adjust  their  home  care  routines,  or  so  they  can  seek  an 
escalation  in  care  if  they  identify  a  problem.  Among 
providers  and  clinical  health  workers,  there  exists  an 
opportunity  for  better  screening  and  diagnostic  tools  to 
identify dental caries at early stages. Providers in rural areas 
desire better tools to communicate problem areas to patients 
and their caregivers to bridge oral health care disparities in 
areas with limited access to care. Our results can guide the 
development  of  dental  technologies  that  can  address 
currently unmet needs of patients and providers. 

Author Keywords 
Health, Oral Health, Personal Informatics.  

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces  and presentation  (e.g.,  HCI): 
Miscellaneous  

ACM Reference format: 
PervasiveHealth '18, May 21–24, 2018, New York, NY, USA 
© 2018 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights 
licensed to ACM. ACM 978-1-4503-6450-8/18/05(cid:0)$15.00  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3240925.3240973 

to  oral  health  care  and 

INTRODUCTION 
Lack  of  access 
inadequate 
knowledge of proper oral hygiene leads to an abundance of 
oral  diseases  in  the  United  States.   Education  about  proper 
oral  hygiene  techniques  is  important  because  dental  caries 
is the single most common chronic disease of children aged 
6 to 19 years old and occurs in some degree to 9 out of 10 
adults  over  the  age  of  20  [1].  Cost  is  one  of  the  main 
reasons  that  prevents  adults  from  receiving  regular  dental 
care,  along  with  proximity  to  dental  providers  [2].  Adults 
and  children  living  in  rural  populations  with  increased 
vulnerability  to  oral  health  diseases,  like  Alaskan  Native 
communities,  experience  significant  disparities  in  oral 
health  care  [3].  In  Alaska,  Dental  Health  Aide  Therapists 
to  bridge  oral  health  disparities  by 
(DHATs)  work 
providing  preventative  care  and 
to 
children and adults [3]. While increasingly common, dental 
caries  can  be  avoided  with  proper  oral  hygiene  techniques 
and early detection methods. 

tooth  extractions 

New  oral  health  technologies  could  provide  patients  and 
providers  with  valuable  communication,  education,  and 
feedback leading to prevention of oral diseases. Monitoring 
one’s  oral  health  outside  of  the  dental clinic is  uncommon 
today, but 69% of adults track at least one health indicator 
so  personal  informatics  technologies  are  used  for  many 
other  health-related  goals  [4].  Researchers  in  Human-
Computer  Interaction  (HCI)  has  proposed  some  ways  that 
technology could  support  people  in their oral  health  goals, 
including  Lumio,  DAYA,  Playful  Toothbrush,  and 
Molarcropolis  [5,  6,  7,  8].  However,  there  remains  a  large 
opportunity for technology to improve access to dental care 
and decrease the incidence of oral diseases.  

In  this  research,  we  examine  unmet  information  needs  in 
oral  care  to  identify  opportunities  for  better  monitoring  at 
home and in connecting home care with clinical care. To do 
this,  we  first  gained  an  understanding  of  patient  and 
1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
provider  needs  for  an  oral  health  monitoring  technology 
through  surveys  and  follow-up  interviews.  Then,  we 
explored  how  clinical  health  workers  currently  bridge  oral 
health  care  disparities  in  poor,  rural  areas  with  limited 
access  to  care  by  interviewing  DHATs  in  Alaska,  school 
nurses,  and  clinical  health  workers  in  low  socioeconomic 
clinics,  and  dental  providers.  Together  with  a  review  of 
literature 
following 
opportunities  for  applying  personal  health  informatics 
techniques to oral health: 

in  dentistry,  we 

identify 

the 

•  Facilitating communication between patient and provider 
•  Providing patient-centered care 
•  Visualizing oral health data to ensure early diagnosis 
•  Reducing oral health disparities 

The  HCI and  Ubicomp  research  communities have  already 
begun  work  on  some  of  these needs  pointing to  promising 
future research directions.  Our  results  provide guidance  on 
what new dental monitoring tools must do to succeed. 

in 

BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 
In  this  section,  we  examine  causes  for  disparities  in  oral 
health 
the  United  States,  present  how  personal 
informatics  technologies  in  other  health  conditions  to 
promote  collaboration  between  patient  and  provider,  and 
for  oral  health  monitoring 
discuss 
technologies by reviewing related literature in HCI. 

the  opportunity 

Oral health disparities in the United States 
Among  children  aged  2-5,  23%  presented  dental  caries  in 
their  primary  teeth,  and  60%  of  adolescents  aged  12-19 
have dental caries in their permanent teeth [2]. The number 
of people who annually visit the dentist declines from 85% 
of  children  aged  2-17  to  64.0%  of  adults  aged  18-64,  and 
only 62.7%  of adults  over  the age  of  65 [9].  Along  with  a 
decline  in  dental  visits,  adults  aged  40-64  were  half  as 
likely  (29%)  to  have  all  of  their  teeth  compared  to  adults 
aged  20-39  [2,  10].  Age  is  not  the  only  factor.  Non-
Hispanic white and Asian adults are on average 10% more 
likely  to  have  very  good oral  health  compared to  Hispanic 
or non-Hispanic black adults [11].  

Dentists  are  expensive,  highly  trained,  and  are  uncommon 
in rural areas. Among adults aged 18-64, 42% did not visit 
the  dentist  due  to  cost  or  lack  of  insurance  [2].  Adults 
without  Medicaid  are  half as  likely  to  visit  the  dentist and 
are  five  times  as  likely  to  have  poor  oral  health  as  adults 
with  private  health  insurance  [2].  Many  dental  patients, 
however,  do  not  need  the  skill  of  a  dentist,  but  rather  a 
hygienist or therapist [12]. Hygienists or therapists are less 
expensive  than  dentists  to  train  and  employ,  and  so  there 
can be more of them per capita. For example, Dental Health 
Aide  Therapists  (DHATs)  in  Alaska  are  recruited  from 
local  communities  and  travel  around  Alaska  from  sub-
regional  clinics  to  spend  weeks  to  months  in  remote 
villages  without  access  to  dental  providers.  DHATs  are 

trained  to  perform  preventative  and  restorative  dental  care 
and are supervised by a dentist working in a central city [3]. 
Rural  dental  providers  often  face  problems  with  accessing 
patient’s  previous  medical  history  and providing follow-up 
care  [13].  In  communities  where  there  is  a  sub-regional 
clinic, year-round DHATs are able to do more maintenance 
and  sealants.  Also,  DHATs  provide  annual  screenings  of 
every  school  child’s  teeth,  scheduling  them  for  follow-up 
exams and extractions as needed throughout the year.  

Collaboration with personal informatics 
Personal informatics technologies provide a space for users 
to  set  and  achieve  health-related  goals  while  promoting 
healthy  lifestyles  changes  and  increasing  knowledge  about 
personal  health.  Personal  informatics  technologies  seek  to 
improve  quality  of  life  by  understanding  how  technology 
can  influence  behavior  and  providing  tools  for  education 
and  health  management 
[14].  Furthermore,  personal 
informatics  creates  opportunities  for  contextual  reflection, 
treatment  adjustment,  and  communication  with  providers 
[15].  Contextual information allows  the  user  to  understand 
how  their  daily  life,  environment,  and  treatment  impact 
their  overall  health  [15].  For  many  health  goals,  personal 
informatics is most successful when continued for the long-
term.  However,  keeping  users  motivated  to  track  proves 
difficult when they feel uninterested or discouraged by their 
data  [16].  Focusing  on  overall  wellness  in  informatics 
technologies  keeps  users  engaged  by  emphasizing  that 
health  tracking  is  not  just  about  fixing  a  specific  health 
condition, but rather a tool for maintaining a healthy life [17]. 

Personal  informatics  data  allows  patients  to  describe  their 
everyday  behavior,  routine,  and  limitations  when  they 
review  the  data  with  providers.  This  information  enables 
providers  to  understand  patient  experience  better  and  to 
develop  individualized diagnoses  and  treatment  plans  [18]. 
Providers  can  also  use  patient-tracked  data  as  examples  to 
educate patients on self-management skills [18, 19].  

falls 

short 

In  oral  health  care,  communication  between  patients  and 
providers 
surrounding  patient  concerns, 
education  on  proper  hygiene  techniques,  and  overall 
knowledge  of  personal  oral  health.  The  lack  of  successful 
communication  is  especially  problematic  for  parents  since 
they need  to  know  how  to  properly educate their children. 
Along  with  communication,  patient  follow-up  from  the 
dentist  rarely  occurs  in  rural  locations.  One  of  the  main 
reasons  for  difficulty  in  communication  between  patients 
and  providers  is  the  inability  of  patients  to  properly 
visualize  their  teeth  [16].  Allowing  patients  to  visualize 
their teeth and understand their oral health is a current area 
that needs more research [16]. 

Oral monitoring research in HCI 
Previous projects like LumiO, DAYA, Playful Toothbrush, 
and  Molarcropolis  have  been  designed  to  help  individuals 
spend more attention on areas of their mouth that most need 

2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
it and on helping parents monitor and encourage children's 
brushing [5, 6, 7, 8].  

LumiO  helps  patients  identify  problematic  areas  in  their 
mouth by using quantitative light fluorescence to determine 
how  much  plaque  exists  on  each  tooth  [5].  As  the  user 
brushes  their  teeth  and  removes  the  plaque,  the  vibrations 
on  the  toothbrush  decrease,  giving  the  user  immediate 
feedback on the quality of their brushing. Informed by this 
feedback,  people  using  LumiO  can  use  the  feedback  to 
allow  their  toothbrush  to  linger  longer  on  teeth  that  have 
more  plaque  and  thus  hopefully  improve  their  oral  health. 
Three  other  systems  have  been  designed  to  help  parents 
monitor  children’s  brushing  and  to  motivate  children  to 
brush  properly.  DAYA  is  a  mobile  application  for  parents 
and  a  toothbrush  that  monitors  how  their  children  brush. 
The  DAYA  system  was  created  on  the  basis  that  children 
do  not  understand  the  necessity  of  brushing  their  teeth, 
children  are fearful  of the  dentist and cavities, and parents 
share  the  same  concerns  as  their  children  but  fail  to  give 
good instructions due to their lack of oral health knowledge 
[6]. Playful Toothbrush seeks to engage children and instill 
them  with  proper  oral  health  habits  by  means  of 
gamification  [7].  The  Playful  Toothbrush  aims  to  target 
children  who  are  not  interested  in  brushing  their  teeth  by 
making  the  task  interactive  and  fun.  Also,  the  Playful 
Toothbrush educates children  who  do  not  brush  their teeth 
properly.  Along  with  Playful  Toothbrush,  Molarcropolis 
engages  children  and  increases  oral  health  awareness  by 
using  gamification 
three  ways:  cause-and-effect 
simulations,  suggestion,  and  attractiveness  [8].  Cause-and-
effect simulations quickly show users how their teeth would 
deteriorate  with  poor  oral  hygiene  habits,  suggestion 
provides  an  educational  component,  and  the  attractiveness 
of the system is tailored to the target audience. 

in 

RESEARCH GOALS 
Existing  oral  health  monitoring  systems  address  important 
oral  health  needs  beyond  the  dental  clinic.  They  can  help 
people  monitor  and  self-regulate  the  frequency,  intensity, 
and  duration  of  their  home  care.  New  research  prototypes 
can  help  people  know  when  and  where  plaque  is  building 
up in their mouth and provide assistance for immediate oral 
health  needs.  Research 
focused  on  motivating  and 
educating  children  to  brush  well  has  the  potential  to  build 
important habits at a formative time.  

In this research, we sought to step back from the goals and 
benefits  of  any  one  system 
to  develop  a  better 
understanding  of  unmet  information  needs  in  dental  care, 
focusing  on  the  needs  of  adult  patients,  caregivers,  and 
dental  providers. We  also  sought  to  examine  needs  among 
underserved  populations.  While  the  prototype  systems 
described  above  address  important  oral  health  concerns, 
they  are  designed  for  individual  or  individual  family  use. 
Pricey individual medical devices run the risk of “being out 
of  reach  of  those  who  need  them  most”,  a  charge  that  has 

been  leveled  in  public  discourse  against  wearables  and 
other  personal  health  technologies  [20].  As  a  result,  we 
sought to understand needs and opportunities for use of oral 
health  monitoring  that  could  help  people  across  income 
levels,  or  especially  people  who  are  currently  underserved 
by dental health care.  

As  we  conducted  our  research,  we  used  four  principles  of 
the  quantified-self  movement  --  self-improvement,  self-
discovery,  self-awareness,  and  self-knowledge  --  to  probe 
for  opportunities,  as  they  represent  common  information 
needs that can be supported by monitoring technology [21]. 
We  also  sought to  identify  individual  patient  goals  beyond 
the  oral  health  goals  recommended  by  The  Institute  of 
Medicine  Committee  on  Future  of  Dental  Education. 
Considering these goals, such as whiter teeth, better breath, 
and reduced  sensitivity,  allowed  our  investigation  to  better 
take into account individual priorities and motivations.  

METHODS 
To  explore  opportunities  for  oral  health  monitoring 
technologies  beyond 
the  dental  clinic,  we  gathered 
perspectives  of  personal  users  and  medical  providers.  We 
first  conducted  surveys  with  152  people  who  brush  their 
teeth  at  least  once  a  day  and  followed-up  with  eight 
participants  in  semi-structured  interviews.  To  include  a 
provider  perspective,  we  conducted 
semi-structured 
interviews  with  twelve  medical  providers  including  six 
school  nurses, two community  health  workers,  one  dentist, 
one dental assistant, and two Dental Health Aide Therapists 
who work in remote, rural populations.  

Surveys and Interviews about personal use 
To  investigate  opportunities  for  oral  health  monitoring  at 
home,  we  first  conducted  a  survey  of  152  people  ranging 
from  18 to over  75  years  old  that  brush their  teeth at  least 
once a  day.  Table  1  shows  survey participants  grouped  by 
age.  We  recruited  participants  through  university  mailing 
lists  and  posting  the  survey  on  Facebook  and  community 
groups. We included only participants over 18 years of age 
and  who  brushed  their  teeth  at  least  once  a  day.  We 
anticipated that people who do not already brush their teeth 

Participant ID 

Count 

S0-S49 

S50-S77 

S78-S102 

S103-S119 

S120-S136 

S137-146 

S147-S152 

50 

28 

25 

17 

17 

10 

5 

Age 

18-24 

25-34 

35-44 

45-54 

55-64 

65-74 

75+ 

Table 1: Survey participants 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
once  a  day  would  not  be  likely  to  be  interested  in  adding 
personal  informatics  tools  to  their  oral  health  routine, 
though their motivations and needs merit future study. Each 
survey participant was entered into a raffle for one $100 gift 
card  and  two  $50  gift  cards.  All  participant  data  remains 
anonymous and participants could stop taking the survey or 
not answer a question.  

The  survey  allowed  us  to  ask  a  large  number  of  people 
about  their  current  oral  health  behaviors  and  attitudes,  as 
well as where they wanted more support or information. We 
began  by  asking  participants  questions  about  their  current 
oral care  practices,  their  satisfaction  with their  oral health, 
and goals they might have with their oral health. Then, we 
asked about the patient’s relationship with their dentists and 
how  they  communicate  with  their  dentists.  The  following 
section of the survey focused on how participants track any 
other  health-related  goals  and  explored  if  oral  health 
monitoring  would  be  of  interest.  Finally,  the  survey  asked 
participants  with  children  at  home  about  their  experiences 
with  helping  their  children  with  their  oral  care  and 
maintaining good oral health. 

Survey  responses  informed  the  design  of  the  follow-up 
interviews  and  who  we  recruited.  Quantitative  data,  like  a 
ranking  of  oral  health  satisfaction,  were  analyzed  by  with 
descriptive  statistics  and  visualizations.  Qualitative  data, 
like  open  response  questions,  were analyzed  by  coding  for 
similar themes based on our research questions. 

We selected follow-up interview participants to represent as 
many age groups as possible that we saw in survey results, 
and  we  randomly  selected  the  participants  within  each 
group.  Table  2  shows  occupational  information  and  teeth 
brushing frequency for interview participants. All follow-up 
interview  participants  signed  a  consent  form  stating  that 
their answers would be completely confidential, they could 
choose  not  to  answer  any  question,  and  they  could 
withdraw  from  the  study  at  any  time.  Each  interview 
participant was compensated with a $25 gift card. The goal 
of  the  thirty-minute  semi-structured  interview  was  to 
determine  how  personal  informatics  fits  into  their  life, 
understand what information they might want from an oral 
health monitoring device, and get a sense of how oral health 

Participant ID  Occupation  Teeth brushing freq  Age 

P1 

P2 

P3 

P4 

P5 

P6 

P7 

P8 

Student 

Once a day 

Business 

Twice a day 

Researcher 

Once a day 

Engineer 

Once a day 

Student 

Twice a day 

Homemaker  Once a day 

Researcher 

Once a day 

Student 

Twice a day 

18-24 

55-64 

25-34 

35-44 

18-24 

45-54 

25-34 

18-24 

monitoring might work best for them. 

The  interview  was  semi-structured  so  that  each  participant 
was  asked  the  same  questions,  but  as  new  needs  or  wants 
became  apparent  they  could  be  explored  in  the  interview. 
The interview began by asking participants about their oral 
health  goals  and  knowledge  about  their  oral  health.  Next, 
the  interview  asked  about  participant  experiences  with 
dentists, including  receiving education and  recommendations. 
Finally,  the  interview  sought  to  discover  how  participants 
might use a wand that tracks the plaque load on their teeth. 
We  asked  participants  more  about  how  they  track  other 
health-related  goals  and  asked  them  to  describe  how  they 
would  use  a  wand  that  helps  them  track  oral  health  goals, 
easily  see  trends  in  the  graphical  data  from  quantitative 
measures  of  bacterial  load,  and  monitor  any  therapeutic 
gains  prescribed  by  their  dentist.  After  the  interviews, 
quotes  were  coded  into  eleven  different  themes  based  on 
apparent needs and wants of the participants. 

treatment.  We 

Interviews with oral health providers 
In  our  interviews  with  health  providers,  we  included  both 
current  oral  health  providers  and  potential  oral  health 
the  potential  of  oral  health 
providers.  This  reflects 
technology to both improve existing oral health care and to 
for  delivering  oral  health 
create  new  opportunities 
screening  and 
interviewed  12  health 
providers  with  a  variety  of  occupations  to  learn  about 
opportunities  for  medical  providers  using  an  oral  health 
monitoring device for children and adults without access to 
regular  dental care. Table  3  shows  occupational  details  for 
interview  participants.  The  semi-structured 
interviews 
roles  and 
to  gather  baseline  data  on 
allowed  us 
responsibilities  for  each  community  health  worker  while 
allowing  each  participant  to  go  in  a  direction  that  felt 
important  to  them.  We  recruited  school  nurses  and 
community  health  workers  through  online  searches  and 
public-school directories. The recruitment email stated that 
we  were  interested  in  learning about  their  experiences and 
needs  as  a  school  nurse  and  how  an  oral  health-screening 
device  might  fit  into  their  routines.  All  community  health 
workers  and  school  nurses  signed  a  consent  form  stating 
that  their  answers  would  be  completely  confidential,  they 
could  choose  not  to  answer  any  question,  and  they  could 
withdraw  from  the  study  at  any  time.  Each  interview 
participant was compensated with a $25 gift card. 

The  thirty-minute  interview  asked  school  nurses  and 

Participant ID 

Count  Occupation 

M1-M6 

M7-M8 

M9-M10 

M12 

M13 

6 

2 

2 

1 

1 

School nurse  

Dental Health Aide Therapist 

Community health worker 

Family dentist 

Hospital dentistry special assistant 

Table 2: Interview participants 

Table 3: Provider participants 

4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
their 

roles  and 
community  health  workers  about 
responsibilities,  how  often  they  have  dental  patients, 
experiences  during  dental  visits,  and  how  an  oral  health 
screening  and  tracking  device  might  fit  into  their  routine. 
Community  health  workers  were  asked  about  how  often 
dental  caries  is  present  in  their  patients  and  what  the 
treatment  looks  like.  We  also  asked  about  how  the  school 
nurses and community health workers educate their patients 
and  what  recommendations they  give.  After  the  interviews 
were  conducted,  the  interviews  were  coded  with  an  open 
coding  method.  The  codes  were  discussed  and  iterated  as 
new themes became apparent. 

RESULTS 
Overall,  participants described a  desire  for technology  that 
could  assist  with  oral  health  education,  prevention, 
detection, and  communication  among  family  members and 
with oral health providers. Personal users were interested in 
monitoring  their  oral  health  to  better  understand  their  oral 
health,  achieve  personal  goals,  visualize  their  progress 
between dental visits for feedback, and properly adjust their 
home care routines. Among medical providers, there exists 
an  opportunity  for  better  screening  and  diagnostic  tools  to 
identify  dental  caries  at  early  stages  and  to  serve  as  a 
communication  tool  for  patients  and  their  caregivers.  We 
find  that  oral  health  monitoring  technologies  have  the 
opportunities  to  facilitate  communication  and  coordination 
between patients and providers and to provide personalized 
education  and  feedback.  Our  results  also  show 
that 
monitoring oral health has the potential expanding access to 
oral health care in rural, underserved areas. 

their  patients, 

to  communicate  with 

Facilitating patient-provider communication 
People face many barriers in communicating with their oral 
health  providers.  Despite best efforts  to educate  patients,  a 
dental  assistant  (M13)  reported  “we  give  these  patients  all 
this education, and yet they come back and look exactly the 
same.”  Medical  providers  also  expressed  difficulty  with 
instructing  patients  about  diet  and  abstaining  from  sugary 
sodas  to  reduce  cavities.  Despite  best  efforts from  medical 
providers 
the 
information was often not received. A family dentist (M12) 
reflected on communicating with their patients: “prevention 
is  the key. People  don't  go  [to  the  dentist].  They  don't like 
us. They don't like dental offices. They don't like dentists.” 
When community health workers had time to do education, 
they  primarily instructed  people  on how  to brush  and  floss 
properly,  but  many  patients  learned  incorrect  brushing 
techniques from their parents. Therefore, community health 
they 
workers  often  had 
communicate  with  their  patients.  A  DHAT  (M7)  educated 
their  patients  using  a  unique  method:  “Sometimes  I  use 
metaphors,  like  ‘where  else  do  you  have  germs?  On  our 
hands.  What  do you  do to  take  the  germs  off  your hands?’ 
They  tell  me  they  wash  their  hands.  I  ask  them,  ‘what 
happens  if  you  don't  wash  your  hands?’  They  usually  say 
they get sick, and then I use that as a metaphor.” 

to  be  creative  about  how 

From a patient perspective, P5 found that their dentist “just 
told  me  I  didn't  have  much  problems  and  they  gave  free 
samples of floss and that's it. They didn't really tell me what 
I  should  do  for  my  teeth  though.”  Finding  the  right 
questions to ask their dentist is also hard for personal users, 
so  many  resorted  to  asking  general  questions  like  “is 
everything  ok?”  (P4).  While  providers  were  able  to  gather 
information  from  a  visual  examination  of  the  mouth,  P4 
found it frustrating that “they don't really ask if I'm flossing 
or anything.” When reflecting on their communication with 
their  dentist,  P8  recounted  that  their  “dentist  talks  kind  of 
fast,  but  I  think  the  use  of  images  and  you  know  like  3D 
modeling  or  things  like  that,  that  would  be  really  useful, 
because  it's  hard for  me to, when  she  describes  teeth,  and 
tries  to  kind  of  draw  it  out,  it’s  a  very  like  1D,  just  linear 
tooth  model.  It's  really  difficult  for  me  to  visualize  which 
tooth  she's  talking  about,  so  I  think  just  some  kind  of 
visualization  product  would  be  really  cool  when  talking 
about a patient's teeth.” 

Providing personalized education and feedback 
Personal  users  and  community  health  workers  expressed 
concerns  about  lack  of  oral  health  knowledge.  Preventing 
tooth decay is  the  number  one oral  health  goal  for  125 out 
of  152  survey  respondents,  yet  86  survey  respondents 
expressed 
that  proper  home  care,  mainly  brushing 
techniques  and  frequency  of  flossing,  remains  their  main 
confusion  surrounding  oral  health.  76  out  of  152  survey 
respondents  indicated  that  they  would  like  to  monitor  the 
amount  of  plaque  buildup  on  their  teeth.  Specifically,  S87 
responded that they would "like to know which teeth, if any, 
are at risk for cavities, and how bad the damage is." Many 
personal  users  rely  on  self-discovery  for  oral  health.  For 
example, P4 recounted that they simply “know the areas of 
my mouth that I need to give extra attention to.” 

if 

to 

tell 

information  about 

Retaining  oral  health  knowledge  after  appointments  was 
also  difficult.  P6  stated:  “right  after  I  finish  the  dentist,  I 
know  quite  a  bit.  But  before  I  go  to  the  dentist,  not  as 
much.” Personal users wanted more specific feedback from 
the 
their  dentist  and  were  not  able 
recommendations  are  working.  P1  described  that  they 
“want  much  more  practical 
the 
mechanics  of  flossing.  Does  it  appear  that  I'm  doing 
something  right,  something  wrong?  I  don't  know.  Just  the 
more  practical  advice  that  maybe  you've  always  just 
assumed you know how to do something the right way and 
maybe you don't.” Personal users were interested in gaining 
oral  health  knowledge  for  increasing  overall  health  and 
debunking  confusion  around  dental  visits.  P3,  who 
struggled  with  extreme  dental  fear,  thought  “that  it  would 
help  allay  some  of  my  dental fears if  I  actually knew  what 
was  going  on,  like  if  I  walked  into  the  next  dental 
appointment  and  wasn't  completely  freaked  out  by  the 
unknown.”  Personal  users  were  also  interested  in  learning 
about  their  oral  health  for  prevention,  P2  stated  “had  I 
jumped  on  board  of  preventing  enamel  damage  earlier, 

5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
rather  than  trying  to  just  put  a  Band-Aid  fix  now,  I  think 
that that would have been really good.” 

Community health workers focus on providing “basic oral 
hygiene”  (M5)  due  to  an  almost  complete  lack  of  oral 
health  knowledge  in  most  patients.  In  particular,  parents 
often  do  not  have  sufficient  oral  health  knowledge  to  pass 
on  to  their  children.  One  dentist  (M10)  noted  that  oral 
health  knowledge  is  “lacking  in  80%.  Then,  so  I  give 
advice.  Just  make  sure  your  child  brushes.  If  you  let  your 
child brush his or her teeth, then, do it right. They do it the 
best  they  can,  but  they  don't  know  what's  the  best.”  When 
reflecting  on  the  ability  to  get  children  involved  in  proper 
oral  hygiene,  one  school  nurse  (M6)  stated  that  “this  past 
school year, I had a lot of trouble getting the middle school 
boys  to  brush.  It  was  very  difficult  working  with  them  this 
year.  So  I  gotta  try  to  figure  out  a  better  way  of  getting 
them intrigued with taking care of their oral health.” 

Monitoring oral health for early diagnostics 
Community  health  workers  would  benefit  from  an  oral 
health  monitoring  tool as  a better  diagnostic  tool of  dental 
caries at an earlier stage. It is difficult for providers to tell if 
a  tooth  is  just  discolored  or  if  there  is  decay  based  on  a 
visual  assessment.  For  extreme  cases  of  caries,  such  as 
those between the back teeth, it is also difficult to tell how 
deep it is until the restorative treatment takes place. 

An oral health monitoring system used as a diagnostic tool 
would  allow community  health  workers  in rural  areas,  like 
traveling  DHATs,  an  opportunity  to  easily  see  trends  in 
patient  bacterial  load  on  each  tooth  and  make  early  and 
accurate  diagnoses.  A  DHAT  (M8)  expressed  a  general 
need  and  ability  to  incorporate  a  caries  detection  tool  in 
their  day-to-day  work  due  to  the  volume  of  dental  caries 
and  poor  oral  hygiene.  In  regard  to  providing  early 
detection  of  caries  by  using  an  oral  health  monitoring 
device to detect plaque loads, one community health worker 
(M10)  said  “if  there  was  a  fairly  accurate,  I  would  say  I 
would need to be at least 80% accurate or something that it 
is  a  cavity  and  not  a  stain,  then  we  could  treat  cavities 
when they're smaller. It's always easier to fix a tooth when 
the  cavity's  small  than  when  it's  bigger.  So  essentially,  as 
soon as you start getting a filling, like the rest of your life, 
that tooth is probably going to need another thing later on 
because fillings only last, I don't know, ten, fifteen years. If 
you're  young,  eventually  it's  going  to  have  to  be  replaced 
and every time it gets replaced, it gets bigger.”  

Expanding access to oral health care 
We found potential for expanding access to oral health care 
with oral health monitoring by creating a low-cost, portable, 
time-efficient  device.  Some  DHATs, 
like  M7,  have 
programs  to  work  in  schools  and  screen  every  student  in 
their town, but in villages where the DHATs must travel to 
have  less  care,  so  their  time  is  focused  on  providing 
extractions rather than education and sealants. The ability to 
provide  education  is  crucial,  because  most  oral  diseases, 

including  dental  caries,  are  preventable  with  proper 
education on basic hygiene practices. Both DHATs (M7 & 
M8) expressed interest in a tool that monitors and educates 
patients about their oral health. Adopting a new monitoring 
device  for  rural  dental  providers  and  community  health 
workers  can  be  difficult  due  to  poor  communication 
infrastructure,  time  and  cost  of  technical  training,  and 
installation  and  maintenance  costs.  However,  M8  talked 
about how “if it was portable, or it could roll to the school, 
'cause I do my school screenings in the school, I'd use it in 
the  school  and  I'd  use  it  in  the  clinic.  Then  that  would  be 
good  to help  monitor  if  the  decay is  getting  larger  or  it  is 
porous. But  I  think  that's  a  really  good  idea and  I think it 
would really help me.” M7 also stressed portability and the 
need  for  an  oral  health  monitoring  device  to  be  small 
“because you have to take it on a plane with you and there's 
a  lot  of  gear  we  have  to  take”  when  travelling  to  remote 
Alaskan villages. 

to 

it  difficult 

Since education and prevention are paramount for good oral 
health,  we  find  that  focusing  on  children  who  are  still 
developing  oral  health  habits  to  be  the  population  in  most 
need.  However,  all  6  school  nurses  interviewed  work  at 
multiple  schools,  making 
implement 
consistent  education  and  prevention  programs.  Requiring 
annual dental screenings is done by the state, and few states 
have  chosen  to  require  such  screening.  Without  state 
requirements,  busy  school  nurses  lack  time,  funding,  and 
resources  to  incorporate  oral  health  monitoring  for  their 
students.  One  school  nurse  (M1)  expressed  that  they  have 
“too much work, not enough time. You can’t do everything, 
because  it’s  not  possible.  So,  with  my  four  things  I  have 
1400 kids for me. I just have to start letting things go.” 4 of 
6 school nurses expressed being overwhelmed by mandated 
responsibilities, and they have little time to do other things. 
Schools  have  limited  funding,  and  expensive  equipment 
makes  it  difficult  to  change  or  add  new  tools  into  school 
nurses’  routines.  For example,  near  vision  screenings  have 
been  added  to  the  list  of  Washington  State  mandated 
screenings.  However,  the  tool  needed  to  for  the  vision 
screening  is  too  expensive  for  every  school  to  buy.  With 
funding  in  mind,  a  school  nurse  stated  that  they  are  “It’s 
always  grant  writing  and  you  know  just  trying  to  scrape 
together  money  because  our  health  services  don’t  really 
have a budget aside from just to pay staff.” 5 school nurses 
explained  how  their  schools  rely  on  outside  community 
health  agencies  to  ensure  every  student  has  at  least  one 
annual  dental  screening.  However,  school  nurse  (M3) 
expressed  disappointed  that  another  parental  consent  was 
required  for  the  dental  screenings  by  community  health 
agencies, and so not all students were actually able to get a 
dental  screening.  School  nurse  M2  spoke  about  their 
sadness  and  frustration  regarding  the  lack  of  young  parent 
oral  health  education  and  the  parents’  inability  to  stress 
good oral health with their young kids: "Too many children 
have  been  seen  in elementary  schools  with fillings  in  their 

6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
baby teeth, which sets them up to have more overall health 
problems in the future."  

Oral  health  monitoring  technologies  used  outside  of  the 
dental clinic could reduce oral health disparities by increasing 
access  to  dental  care.  While  lack  of  time  and  funding 
presents problems for school nurses, oral health monitoring 
technologies  can  aid  community  health  workers  who 
provide dental screenings to schools or DHATs in Alaska. 

DISCUSSION 
We found that personal users and medical providers present 
specific  wants  and  needs  regarding  oral  health  education, 
communication, prevention, and diagnosis of oral diseases. 
We discuss how monitoring of oral health by personal users 
and medical professionals can reduce oral health disparities 
by  providing  access  to  basic  oral  health  care,  streamlining 
dental visits, and creating awareness of proper oral hygiene 
practices in families and children. 

Bridging dental expertise and personal practice 
Currently,  dentists,  community  health  workers,  or  other 
trained experts are necessary for people to assess their oral 
health and monitor whether many problems, such as carries, 
are  worsening  or  improving.  As  a  result,  patients  often 
follow  their  home  care  routine  with  little  feedback  about 
whether  they  are  doing  it  correctly  or  whether  it  is 
achieving  the  desired  results.  They  may  not  discover 
problems until more serious measures, such as a filling, are 
needed.  From  an  oral  health  professional’s  perspective, 
when  patients  arrive  at  the  clinic  appointment,  health 
professionals can only see the results (e.g., whether patients 
have cavities)  but  not  what  patients have tried  (e.g.,  if and 
how well they use floss).  

When describing what to do at home, oral health providers 
often  rely  on  verbal  descriptions  and  demonstrations  on 
themselves  or  the  patient.  This  in-person  demonstration 
enables  patients  to  ask  questions,  but  the  details  may  be 
hard  to  remember.  Once  home,  the  patient  may  forget 
which  tooth  exactly  they  were  supposed  to  brush  better, 
which  flossing  technique  their  hygienist  demonstrated,  or 
the advice entirely. 

Personal  health  technologies  can  help  bridge  the  gaps 
between clinical encounters, home care, and other everyday 
behaviors  (e.g.,  in  diabetes  [19],  IBS,  weight  management 
[22]  and  Parkinson’s  disease  [23]).  Summaries  and  data 
about  home  care  and  summaries  of  recommendations  made 
during  a  clinical  encounter  can  help  make  work  that  both 
patients and their providers do more effective.  

Making better use of patient time and clinical resources 
Bridging  home care and  the clinic  also  has the  potential  to 
help  people  make  better  use  of  their  time  and  dental 
resources.  Home  monitoring  or  monitoring  available  in  a 
community  setting  (e.g.,  a  kiosk  in  a  pharmacy  or 
community  center)  could  help  people  determine  whether 
they need to see a dental provider. If patients become aware 

of  developing  problems  in  time  and  can  adjust  their  care 
routine  or  apply  a  therapy,  it  may  prevent  a  visit  as  well. 
This  is  particularly  important  for  people  in  rural  areas, 
where access to clinical care may cost significant time and 
inconvenience.  Similar  techniques,  e.g.,  blood  pressure 
kiosks  in  clinic  waiting  rooms  or  pharmacies  [22],  have 
already  shown  promise  for  making  patients  more  engaged 
with their health, helping patients access health resources at 
convenient  locations  and  times,  and  allowing  health 
professionals  to  spend  time  on  other  forms  of  care  rather 
than routine measurements.  

Collective Oral health  
Our  results  also  support  HCI’s  focus  on  oral  health  as  a 
family  concern  [24].  This  previous  research  focuses  on 
encouraging  children  to  adopt  healthy  brushing  habits. 
Inspired by recent research in family tracking [24] however, 
we  believe  this  may  be  just  one  of  a  larger  set  of 
opportunities for supporting oral health within families. 

While  parents  can  monitor  children’s  oral  care,  shared 
awareness  of  oral  care  could  also  create  the  sense  of  this 
being  a  family  activity.  In  situations  when  one  family 
member  has  a  particular  oral  health  concern,  technologies 
might  be  designed  to  help  the  family  support  them  [24]. 
More 
to  understand 
opportunities  here,  as  there  is  also  the  potential  for  this  to 
become a nag, a surveillance tool, or another annoyance for 
busy families to deal with.  

is  needed, 

research 

though, 

Tools that support monitoring in the home might also create 
opportunities  for  parents  and  children  to  better  educate 
themselves about the efficacy of different oral care routines. 
If  sensitive  enough, 
they  might  even  support  self-
experiments [25]: which flossing technique is better for me? 
How much better is my electric toothbrush than my manual 
brush? If I remove carbonated drinks from my diet, do I see 
an improvement?  

Limitations 
In our recruitment, we emphasized inclusion of parents and 
oral  health  providers  who  could  offer  perspectives  on 
working  in  rural  areas.  As  a  result,  our  participants 
underrepresented  the  elderly  and  possibly  other  groups. 
Additional  opportunities  may  exist 
for  oral  health 
challenges unique to or more prevalent in these groups, and 
future  research  should  examine  their  needs  and  associated 
opportunities in depth. 

Researching  DHATs  in  Alaska  provided  insight  into  oral 
health  monitoring  technologies  might  fit  into  a  clinical 
setting,  but  there  is  a  large  scope  of  clinicians  and 
community  health  workers  and  we  were  only  able  to 
interview 
few  domains.  Finally,  our  survey 
methodology produces a limitation in that it is common that 
what  people  say  they  do and  what they  actually  do tend  to 
differ,  so  it  would  be  difficult  to  draw  specific  design 
recommendations  from  this  data.  However,  we  believe 

in  a 

7 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
results are able to specify clear needs and opportunities for 
future technologies to address. 

Observational Quantitative Study. University of 
Washington Press Release. 

CONCLUSION 
We  contribute 
informatics 
technologies by describing opportunities and limitations for 
oral health monitoring technologies at home and beyond the 
dental clinic. 

the  field  of  personal 

to 

We surveyed 152 people that brush their teeth at least once 
a  day  and  followed  up  with  8  semi-structured  interviews. 
We also  interviewed  12  medical  providers  with a  range  of 
professions in a semi-structured format. 

We learned about the wants and needs of personal users by 
they  keep  track  of  their  oral  health, 
studying  how 
understanding  successes  and  limitations  in  currently  used 
personal  informatics  devices,  and  learning  about  how  oral 
health  monitoring  might  fit  into  their  routines.  We  studied 
the  wants  and  needs  of  medical  providers  for  oral  health 
monitoring  technologies  by  understanding  their  roles  and 
responsibilities,  discovering  how  they  interact  with  dental 
patients,  and  gaining 
into  how  oral  health 
insights 
monitoring would work best for their position. 

We  found  four  distinct  opportunities  for  oral  health 
monitoring  technologies  beyond  the  dental  clinic:  (1) 
Facilitating  communication  between  patient  and  provider 
(2)  Providing  personalized  education  and  feedback  (3) 
Monitoring  oral  health  for  early  diagnostics  (4)  Expanding 
access 
further  discussed 
opportunities  for  oral  health  monitoring  technologies  that 
can  bridge  dental  expertise  and  personal  practice,  make 
better  use  of  patient  time  and  clinical  resources,  and 
promote oral health as a collective effort. 

to  oral  health  care.  We 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  research  was  funded  by  National  Science  Foundation 
awards # IIP-1631146 and IIS-1553167. We thank Morgan 
Duffy for preliminary work that laid important groundwork 
for this research. 

REFERENCES 
1.  BA Dye, S Tan, V Smith, BG Lewis, LK Barker, G 
Thornton-Evans, PI Eke, ED Beltran-Aguilar, AM 
Horowitz, CH Li. 2007. Trends in oral health status, 
United States, 1988-1994 and 1999-2004. Vital Health 
Stat 11; (248):1-92. 

2.  B Bloom, CM Simile, PF Adams, RA Cohen. 2012. 
Oral health status and access to oral health care for 
U.S. adults aged 18–64: National Health Interview 
Survey, 2008. National Center for Health Statistics. 
Vital Health Stat 10(253). 

3.  Donald Chi, Dane Lenaker, Lloyd Mancl, Matthew 
Dunbar, Machael Baab. 2017. Dental Utilization for 
Communities Served by Dental Therapists in Alaska's 
Yukon Kuskokwim Delta: Findings from an 

4.  Susanna Fox, Maeve Duggan. 2013. Tracking for 

Health. Pew Research Center. 
http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/01/28/tracking-for-
health/ 

5.  Takuma Yoshitani, Masa Ogata, Koji Yatani. 2016. 

LumiO: A Plaque Aware Toothbrush. Proceedings of 
the 2016 ACM International Joint Conference on 
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing: 605-615. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2971648.2971704 

6.  Kejia Shao, Jiye Huang, Huaying Song, Runze Li, 

Jinxi Wu. 2014. DAYA: a system for monitoring and 
enhancing children’s oral hygiene. CHI ’14 Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems: 
251-256. https://doi.org/10.1145/2559206.2580927. 

7.  Yu-Chen Chang, Jin-Ling Lo, Chai-Hu Huang, Nan-Yi 
Hsu, Hai-Hua Chu, Hsin-Yen Wang, Pei-Yu Chi, Ya-
Lin Hsieh. 2008. Playful Toothbrush: UbiComp 
Technology for Teaching Tooth Brushing to 
Kindergarten Children. Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems: 
363-372. https://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357115 

8.  Carmen Soler. Alejandra Zacarias, Andres Lucero. 

Molarcropolis: a mobile persuasive game to raise oral 
health and dental hygiene awareness. 2009. 
Proceedings of the International Conference Advances 
in Computer Entertainment Technology.: 388-391. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1690388.1690468 

9.  BA Dye, X Li, G Thornton-Evans. 2012. Oral health 
disparities as determined by selected Healthy People 
2020 oral health objectives for the United States, 2009–
2010. NCHS data brief, no 104. Hyattsville, MD: 
National Center for Health Statistics. 

10.  BA Dye, G Thornton-Evans, X Li, TJ Iafolla. 2015. 

Dental caries and tooth loss in adults in the United 
States, 2011–2012. NCHS data brief, no 197. 
Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 

11.  BA Dye, G Thornton-Evans, X Li, TJ Iafolla TJ. 2015. 
Dental caries and sealant prevalence in children and 
adolescents in the United States, 2011–2012. NCHS 
data brief, no 191. Hyattsville, MD: National Center 
for Health Statistics. 

12.  N. P. Monaghan, M. Z. Morgan. 2015. What 

proportion of dental care in care homes could be met 
by direct access to dental therapists or dental 
hygienists? British Dental Journal: 531-534. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/sj.bdj.2015.919. 

13.  Hossein Pourezza, Sergio Camorlinga, Carson K.S. 
Leung, Bruce Martin. 2010. An information and 
communication technology system to support rural 

8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
healthcare delivery. Proceedings of the 1st ACM 
International Health Informatics Symposium: 440-444. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1882992.1883059 

14.  Francisco Nunes. 2015. Designing Self-care 

Technologies for Everyday Life: A Practice Approach. 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems: 215-218. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2702613.2702624 

Network. The Journal of the American Board of 
Family Medicine 29.5: 620-629. 

23.  Helena Mentis, Anita Kolmlodi, Katrina Schrader, 
Michael Phipps, Ann Gruber-Baldini, Karen 
Yarbrough, Lisa Shulman. 2017. Crafting a View of 
Self-Tracking Data in the Clinical Visit. Proceedings 
of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems: 5800-5812. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025589 

15.  Francisco Nunes, Nervo Verdezoto, Geraldine 

24.  Laura Pina, Sang-wha Sien, Teresa Ward, Jason Yip, 

Fitzpatrick, Morten Kyng, Erik Gronvall, Cristiano 
Storni. 2015. Self-care Technologies in HCI: Trends, 
Tensions, and Opportunities. Proceedings of the 
Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2803173. 

16.  Amid Ayobi, Paul Marshall, Anna L. Cox. 2016. 

Reflections on 5 Years of Personal Informatics: Rising 
Concerns and Emerging Directions. Proceedings of the 
2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems: 2774-2781. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2892406 

17.  Rebecca E, Grinter, Katie A. Siek, Andrea Grimes. 

2010. Wellness informatics: towards a definition and 
grand challenges. CHI ’10 Extended Abstracts on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems: 4505-4508. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1753846.1754185. 

18.  Chia-Fang Chung, Kristin Dew, Allison Cole, Jasmine 
Zia, James Fogarty, Julie Kientz, Sean Munson. 2016. 
Boundary Negotiating Artifacts in Personal 
Informatics: Patient-Provider Collaboration with 
Patient-Generated Data. Proceedings of the ACM 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work Conference.  

19.  Lena Mamykina, Elizabeth Mynatt, Patricia Davidson, 
Daniel Greenblatt. 2008. MAHI: Investigation of 
Social Scaffolding for Reflective Thinking in Diabetes 
Management Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems: 477-486 

20.  J Elias. 2015. Why Wearables are Out of Reach for 

People Who Need Them Most. Forbes Magazine. 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/jenniferelias/2015/10/27/
the-leftovers-part-i-the-cost-of-
activity/#791cd70d63c9.  

21.  Gary Wolf. 2010. The Quantified Self. Ted @ Cannes. 
https://www.ted.com/talks/gary_wolf_the_quantified_s
elf 

22.  Chia-Fang Chung, Sean A. Munson, Matthew 

Thompson, Laura-Mae Baldwin, Jeffrey Kaplan, 
Randall Cline, Beverly B. Green. 2016. 
Implementation of a New Kiosk Technology for Blood 
Pressure Management in a Family Medicine Clinic: 
from the WWAMI Region Practice and Research 

Sean Munson, James Fogarty, Julie Kientz. 2017. From 
Personal Informatics to Family Informatics: 
Understanding Family Practices around Health 
Monitoring. Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference 
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social 
Computing: 2300-2315. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998362 

25.  Ravi Karkar, Jasmine Zia, Roger Vilardaga, Sonali R 
Mishra, James Fogarty, Sean A Munson, Julie A 
Kientz; 2016. A framework for self-experimentation in 
personalized health, Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, 23(3): 440–448. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocv150 

9 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
