Participant Driven Photo Elicitation for Understanding 
Activity Tracking: Benefits and Limitations 

Nanna Gorm & Irina Shklovski 
IT University of Copenhagen 
Denmark 
{nanj, irsh}@itu.dk 

ABSTRACT 
Studying  in-situ  technology  use  over  time  can  be  difficult 
and  this  is  especially  so  when  considering  technologies 
such  as  activity  tracking  devices  explicitly  designed  to  be 
unobtrusive. Yet understanding activity tracking in practice 
is crucial, as tracking technologies become important tools 
for health promotion and health insurance programs. In this 
paper, we describe a method for a longitudinal participant-
driven photo  elicitation  study  of  activity  tracking.  During 
the five-month long study, our drop-out rates were low and 
we  observed 
lapses  and 
idiosyncratic  practices  with 
particular  use  patterns  among  participants  along  with 
significant self-reflection on activity tracking as a practice. 
We describe our method in detail, discussing the necessary 
adaptations  for the study of  activity tracking practices. We 
offer  our  experiences  of  benefits  and  challenges  of  this 
process,  and  suggest  points  for  consideration  for  future 
studies in the area. 

Author Keywords 
Activity tracking; photo elicitation; research methods. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation: 
Miscellaneous  

INTRODUCTION 
Activity trackers (such as FitBit, Jawbone and the like) are 
increasingly popular with industry reports asserting that just 
over  one  quarter  of  Americans  use  some  sort  of  digital 
device  to  track  health  and  fitness  [27].  The  uptake  of 
wearable  activity  tracking  devices  is  accompanied  by  an 
excited rhetoric about the health benefits to be gained from 
their  use.  Yet  most  of  these  devices  are  abandoned  within 
six months of first use [15]. Anecdotal stories also suggest 
that  people  often  cheat  in  creative  ways  to  log  more  steps 
than  they  actually  walked  by  shaking  their  tracker  or 
mounting it on a dog’s collar for example [19]. Yet despite 
the proliferation of research in this area, we still know very 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
from 
specific  permission 
Permissions@acm.org. CSCW '17, February 25-March 01, 2017, Portland, 
OR,  USA Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights 
licensed 
 DOI: 
to  ACM. ACM  978-1-4503-4335-0/17/03…$15.00 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998214 

fee.  Request  permissions 

and/or 

a 

little  about  the  lived  experience  of  everyday  usage  of 
activity  trackers  and  how  this  usage  develops  over  time  in 
order  to  understand  why  the  failure  rate  of  intended  use  is 
so  high.  This  is  in  part  due  to  the  fact  that  studies  of 
technologies  ‘in  use’  are  notoriously  difficult,  having  to 
rely  on  either  extensive  ethnographic  and  participant 
observation approaches or, most often, on self-report that is 
sometimes  complimented  by  sensor-based  behavioral  data. 
The problem is exacerbated because activity trackers are an 
example  of  technologies  designed  to  be  unobtrusive  and 
largely forgotten when in use.  

have 

produced 

several  models 

Researchers 
for 
understanding  self-tracking  practices  addressing  both 
differences  in  use  practices  and  lapses  in  use  [1,8,20]  and 
investigated  real-world  use  of  persuasive  technologies  for 
activity  tracking  [11].  Most  often,  these  studies  are  survey 
or interview-based [8,11,18], with some studies conducting 
follow-up  interviews  with  very  active  users  after  shorter 
periods of time [23]. With a different approach, Clawson et 
al.  analyzed  Craigslist  advertisements  for  used  devices 
being  sold  [6].  Although  these  studies  provide  valuable 
insights,  understanding  how  activity  tracking  use  develops 
over  time  has  proved  elusive  as  all  of  the  above-listed 
approaches primarily rely on verbal self-report with all the 
attendant  problems  with  memory  and  recall  accuracy  [31]. 
As  such,  researchers  continue  to  call  for  more  empirical 
research on everyday uses of self-tracking [24]. 

Part  of  the  problem  is  that  activity  tracking  happens 
alongside  other  daily  activities,  with  only  occasional 
moments  of  direct  engagement.  Users  might  check  step-
counts  while  making  breakfast  or  look  at  sleep-data  while 
waiting  for  the  bus.  Following  these  developments  over 
several  months  is  difficult.  There  is  no  one  fixed  place 
where  the  activity  can  be  observed  and  focused  on  one 
aspect of use. Despite the expectation of continuous use of 
trackers  for  health  management  purposes,  research  cited 
above  suggests  that  much  of  the  use  is  episodic,  with 
frequent  lapses  and  “creative  uses”.  Such  episodic  use  is 
difficult  to  study  through  traditional  approaches.  Yet  as 
these  devices  become  ever  more  central  to  discourses  on 
behavior  change  efforts,  health  promotion  campaigns  and 
even health insurance discount programs, understanding the 
lived dynamics of activity tracker use over time is crucial.  

In this paper we detail a methodology and study design that 
relies  on  participant-driven  photo  elicitation.  The  use  of 

Session: Tracking Activity & HealthCSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA1350 
photo  elicitation  may  seem  counter-intuitive  for  studying 
devices that are designed to be largely invisible when in use 
but  we  found  our  approach  to  be  successful.  Our  study 
allowed  us  to  gain  significant  insight  into  dynamics  of 
activity tracker use over the course of five months, working 
with  novice,  occasional,  and  experienced  users.  Here  we 
describe  our  adaptation  of  photo  elicitation,  experience 
sampling, and photo diary methods for studying intermittent 
and often idiosyncratic use of activity tracking devices. We 
discuss  the  methodological  considerations,  successes  and 
failures  that  arose  in  the  course  of  our  research  and 
conclude  with  suggestions  for  how  this  approach  may  be 
successfully  employed  to  further  our  understanding  of 
activity tracking in practice.  

STUDYING TECHNOLOGY IN USE 
Studying  technologies  “in  use”  means  investigating  the 
very experience of use. No automatic measurement of data 
produced  in  the  course  of  usage  activities  or  external 
observations  of  practices  can  get  at  understanding  how 
technologies  are  experienced  by  individuals.  Thus  self-
reports  of  why  and  how  technology  use  had  occurred  are 
usually  collected  alongside 
the  automatic  methods. 
Research  has  suggested  various  methods  to  support  self-
report and to mitigate associated memory and recall issues.  

is 

insight 

in  self-report  research 

A  significant  concern 
that 
participants  may  answer  in  socially  desirable  ways  that  do 
not necessarily align with actual experience [25]. Projective 
interviewing is one approach attempting to circumvent this 
issue  [12].  Projective  interviewing  techniques  make  use  of 
materials such as objects, photos, or diagrams as part of the 
interview  process.  These 
techniques  were  originally 
developed in clinical and psychoanalytical research to gain 
better 
to  get 
into  patients’  problems, 
participants  (or  patients)  to  more  easily  communicate 
experiences, that might otherwise be hard to study [25]. For 
example,  the  Rorschach  Inkblot  Test  can  help  patients 
project  their  own  thoughts  and  feelings  onto  others  (or  in 
this  case  onto  an  object)  [25].  Projective 
interview 
techniques  have  also  been  employed  in  consumer  research 
because  consumers  may  fear  being  judged  negatively  if 
they revealed their opinions or attitudes towards the subject, 
or in most cases brands and products, under study.  

trying 

Diary  studies  is  an  alternative  approach  to  understanding 
mundane  practices  that  are  difficult  to  externally  observe 
[4]. Paper- and pencil-based diaries have been followed by 
experience  sampling  methods,  made  possible  as  personal 
technologies became ubiquitous. Early experience sampling 
methods (ESM) studies added ways of pinging participants 
to  remind  them  to  fill  out  their  diary  entries  [3].  In  more 
recent  studies,  participants  are  typically  asked  at  random 
times throughout the day about what they are doing via an 
app  [32:1545].  Yue  et  al.  also  suggested  allowing 
participants  to  also  add  media  for  later  use  in  interviews 
[32].  One  of  the  biggest  issues  with  conducting  diary  or 
ESM  studies  is  that  the  demand  of  commitment  and 

workload  from  participants  can  be  quite  high,  reducing 
participation and increasing dropout rates.  

Methodological  developments  of  the  approaches  described 
above  have  resulted  in  a  variety  of  media  elicitation 
methods. ‘Media elicitation’ involves participants capturing 
audio, photo or video and even collecting objects, in order 
to  reflect  on  their  experiences.  In  media  elicitation  studies 
participants are later interviewed about the items they have 
chosen to capture or collect.  

Besides including photos in research studies, some research 
has  investigated  using  video-methods  for  understanding 
everyday  use  of  technologies.  This  entails  that  the  user 
captures video of the system they are working with. While 
this  “trouble-spotting”  is  useful  for  understanding  specific 
systems and their use [30], there are other shortcomings of 
the  method.  For  example,  setting  this  up  in  the  context  of 
activity tracking would only give access to the experiences 
people  have  when  they  are  already  in  the  app  or  working 
directly  with  the  tracking  system.  There  are  many  aspects, 
however,  that  connect  to  use  beyond  the  minutes  the 
participant  is  looking  at  the  app.  Many  experiences  and 
contingencies outside the actual use of the device influence 
individual  self-tracking  practices  [8,23].  Looking  purely  at 
the data, or at the interaction with the device alone can tell 
very little of the overall lived experience.  

tasks 

to  provoke 

In  the  area  of  design,  researchers  have  used  ‘cultural’  or 
‘design’  probes  to  engage  participants,  using  designed 
objects,  photographs  or 
reflective 
responses  from  participants  [2].  Some  such  studies  have 
used  probes  to  collect  reactions  and  reflections  over  time, 
typically to support and inspire an on-going design process 
[13].  The  materials  used  in  the  probes  are  designed  and 
produced  by  the  researchers  specifically  for  the  study  and 
can  function  similarly  to  other  projective  methods.  Some 
studies have also used open-ended prompts and instructions 
to  the  participants  to  generate  their  own  media  by  taking 
pictures  with  their  own  cameras  or  those  provided  by 
researchers [17]. These latter iterations of probes have been 
critiqued  as  alterations  of  the  original  design  of  cultural 
to  epistemological 
probes  without  sufficient  attention 
concerns  [2].  While  such  engagements  are  similar  in  form 
to the media elicitation methods we describe here, the goals 
and  purposes  of  the  method  we  describe  is  different  in  its 
emphasis  on  understanding  lived  experience  with  pre-
existing technology over time. 

Photo elicitation 
Photo  elicitation  refers  to  the  idea  of  using  photographs 
during  an  interview  interaction  with  a  participant,  and  was 
first suggested by Collier in 1957 as an augmentation to the 
qualitative  interview  [16].  The  images  used  in  most  photo 
elicitation  interviews  vary  from  generic  images  to  images 
capturing  known  prior  events  to  images  capturing  the 
interviewee  and  everything  in  between  [16].  These  images 
can be produced either by the researcher or the interviewees 
themselves.  In  the  latter  case  this  is  often  referred  to  as 

Session: Tracking Activity & HealthCSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA1351[5]  or 

“auto-driven” 
“participant-driven”.  We  use 
“participant-driven”  to  avoid  confusion  with  automatic 
capture systems, such as those that have been used in other 
HCI studies.  

Inclusion  of  images  as  part  of  a  self-report  interview 
interaction  with  participants  has  several  benefits.  First, 
images  can  often  lead  to  more  specific  recall  [4,16].  By 
creating  conditions  for  more  precise  recall  of  activities  of 
interest,  the  researcher  may  become  aware  of  aspects  that 
might  have  been  overlooked  in  traditional  interviews  [5]. 
Second,  photo  elicitation  eases  rapport  between 
the 
interviewer and interviewee, facilitating which questions to 
ask,  while  lessening  potential  akwardness  in  the  interview 
situation by providing an object of focus. Third, the process 
of  discussing  photos  can  allow  the  particpant  to  “take  the 
leading role” during the encounter with the researcher [21]. 
Especially 
(as 
opposed  to  using  photos  chosen  by  the  researcher)  photos 
can  become  an  important  element  in  the  research  process 
making  the  interview  into  a  sense-making  collaboration 
[21].  The  meaning  arises  from  the  conversation  betweeen 
participant and researcher, rooted in the visual record of the 
lived experience of the participant [16].  

in  participant-driven  photo  elicitation 

As  with  all  methods,  however,  photo  elicitation  studies 
come with a set of challenges. Some challenges are similar 
to those encountered in any sort of qualitative engagement 
with research participants, while others are particular to this 
method. Considerations of confidentiality and ethics, while 
a  concern  in  any  study,  become  especially  important  with 
photographic  material.  Photographs  can  create  more 
intimate  situations  or  produce  unintended  disclosures.  By 
asking participants to take and share photos, the possibility 
to  gain  more  insight  comes  with  the  risk  of  intruding  on 
participants’  private  sphere.  This  is  a  delicate  balance  that 
demands  that  the  researcher  be  attentive  to  and  aware  of 
this  boundary,  causing  a  potentially  negative  or  stressful 
experience  for  the  participant.  Social  desirability  bias  is 
another  common  aspect  of  any  research  engagement.  By 
virtue of agreeing to participate in a study participants tend 
to  try  to  produce  helpful  and  socially  desirable  content  for 
the  researcher.  The  challenge  with  photos  is  ensuring  that 
participants  do  not  focus  on  producing  photos  that  are 
somehow  judged  to  be  inherently  interesting.  Instead,  the 
goal  is  to  generate  photos  that  would  allow  researchers  to 
expand  on  their  questions,  while  providing  a  way  for 
participants  to  communicate  various  dimensions  of  their 
lives [3].  

Other  challenges  in  photo  elicitation  studies  have  changed 
as  devices  have  changed  and  experience  with  them  vary 
between  communities.  Clark-Ibáñez 
found  challenges 
pertaining  to  inexperience  with  photographic  devices,  and 
costs  of  distributing  disposable  cameras 
to  research 
participants [5]. While this could still be challenging if one 
wishes  to  do  research  in  underserved  communities,  these 
were  not  relevant  in  our  study.  At  the  same  time,  cameras 

have  developed  rapidly,  and  as  such  the  opportunities  and 
challenges now relevant to these types of studies are in need 
of 
revision.  For  example,  phone  cameras  are  so 
commonplace  that  people  have  developed  complex  habits 
around  their  use.  Participant-driven  photo  elicitation  may 
require altering these habits, which could prove difficult to 
accomplish.   

The  use  of  visual  research  methods  is  common  in  CSCW 
research  [22],  where  photography  and  videography  have 
been  used  to  analyze  interactions  and  uses  of  computing 
artifacts  in  a  variety  of  settings  [26].  It  might  be  the  case 
that  even  though  studies  use  photos,  not  just  of  research 
settings but also as a part of the interview, few of these are 
written  up  as  photo  elicitation  studies  [14],  as  is  often  the 
case in anthropology [16]. The collaborative element makes 
participant driven photo elicitation study a particularly good 
fit  for  research  in  the  area  of  CSCW.  Yet  clarifying  the 
benefits  and  challenges  of  participant  driven  photo 
elicitation studies can help move research forward. 

Activity  tracking  technologies  are  in  rapid  development, 
and  pose  many  challenges.  This  includes  understanding 
how people manage lapses in use [1,7], and what might lead 
to  “happy  abandonment”,  where  the  user  for  example 
learned  new  fitness  habits  and  thus  no  longer  needs  the 
device  [6].  Understanding  these  practices  better  could  lead 
to  better  designed  devices,  and  potentially  better 
experiences  of  use.  However,  the  use  of  activity  tracking 
technologies is difficult to observe or survey over extended 
periods  of  time,  for  reasons  stated  above.  As  such,  many 
studies  so  far  have  focused  on  members  of  the  Quantified 
Self  community,  where  self-tracking  practices  are  more 
easily  observed.  Other  studies  have  used  secondary  data 
such  as  Craigslist  listings  [6].  We  believe  that  studies  of 
activity  tracking  need  a  greater  variety  of  tools  in  our 
methodological  arsenal.  Photo  elicitation  is  perhaps  a 
counter-intuitive  method  as  the  “doing”  of  self-tracking 
does  not  obviously  and  easily  lend  itself  to  photo  capture. 
Yet the challenge of it can lead to important self-reflection 
on  self-tracking  practices,  facilitating  and  enriching  self-
reporting  in  interviews.  Thus  photo  elicitation  is  way  to 
encourage continuous reflection rather than a way to closely 
observe tracking practices in-situ. Contact with participants 
over time through photos can help the researcher to follow 
changes in experiences and attitudes as images help trigger 
recall.  Below  we  detail  the  benefits  and  challenges  of 
participant  driven  photo  elicitation  as  we  adapted  this 
method to study activity tracking in practice.   

RESEARCH DESIGN 
The  photo  elicitation  study  of  activity  tracking  users  we 
describe  here  was  conducted  in  Denmark  between  August 
2015 and February 2016. 

Recruiting participants 
We  recruited  participants  using  Facebook  and  snowball 
sampling.  67%  of  all  Danes  have  a  profile  on  Facebook, 
making  this  the  social  network  site  with  the  highest 

Session: Tracking Activity & HealthCSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA1352penetration in the country [29]. We recruited participants by 
posting in relevant Facebook groups and in the networks of 
the  authors.  An  invitation  to  participate  in  the  study  was 
posted in a Facebook group for women in start-ups (‘Ladies 
First’), in FitBit Denmark, and in Fitness.dk (Danish fitness 
chain). Anyone with familiarity of the study, or the authors 
personally,  was  thanked  for  their  interest,  and  asked  to 
share  the  post  in  their  network.  Posting  on  Facebook  was 
initially  meant  to  be  just  one  step  towards  finding 
participants, followed by posters in cafés, libraries or other 
interested 
public  places. 
respondents replied either directly on the post, via e-mail or 
via  private  messages  on  Facebook.  In  order  to  have  as 
broad a picture of activity tracking practices as possible we 
sought  to  include  users  with  various  levels  of  experience, 
educational  background,  geographical  location  (rural  and 
urban),  gender  and  age.  All  participants  were  asked  about 
other  potential  participants, 
the 
snowball sampling method. 

the  end,  however,  64 

thus  making  use  of 

In 

to 

throughout 

Of the 25 final participants, nine participants had little or no 
experience  with  activity  tracking  devices,  and  were  given 
the  choice  of  a  Fitbit  One  or  Fitbit  Flex  to  use  as  they 
the  study.  Eight 
the  course  of 
wanted 
participants  we  categorized  as  occasional  users,  as  they 
would sometimes lapse in the use of their devices, but also 
come  back 
them.  Finally,  eight  participants  we 
categorized  as  continuous  users,  as  they  had  used  their 
device  consistently  for  at  least  four  months  prior  to  the 
study. It is important to highlight that participants switched 
use  patterns  throughout  the  study,  however,  this  initial 
diversity  was  useful  to  give  us  a  broad  insight  into  user 
experiences. All participants received a written explanation 
of  the  purpose  of  the  study,  the  process  of  the  study,  and 
information  on  anonymization  procedures.  Both  the  initial 
and  follow-up  interviews  were,  when  possible,  conducted 
face  to  face  in  the  homes  of  the  participants  or  in  their 
workplace. All interviews were conducted in Danish except 
one conducted in English. Initial interviews were conducted 
with  all  participants  throughout  August  and  September 
2015.  At  the  end  of  the  interview,  participants  that  were 
new  to  tracking  were  given  a  Fitbit  device.  Two  of  these 
new  users  lost  their  devices  shortly  after  the  study  had 
started  (within  1  and  3  weeks).  One  of  these  participants 
gave  a follow-up  account  of  his  experience  via  e-mail,  but 
has been omitted from this study as he had only had a few 
days  with 
tracker.  The  second  participant  was 
interviewed  over  the  phone  and  is  included  in  the  study. 
After the 5 months of the study, two new users did not reply 
to our invitation to a follow-up interview. In total, this study 
builds on the findings from interviews, photos, and e-mails 
from 22 participants.  

the 

Study set-up 
The study was carried out in three phases. In the first phase, 
initial  interviews  were  conducted  in  a  semi-structured 
format. This first interview served as an introduction to the 
study where participants were asked about their occupation, 

preferred  leisure  time  activities,  and  previous  experiences 
with  tracking  physical  activity  as  well  as  other  types  of 
tracking  (finance,  location,  weight).  Participants  were  also 
asked about their habits with regards to taking photos. New 
users  were  asked  about  their  expectations  of  the  devices, 
while  the  rest  of  the  participants  were  interviewed  about 
previous  experiences  and  uses  of  various  devices.  At  the 
end  of  the  interview  we  instructed  participants  to  take 
photos  for  the  next  five  months  of  events  or  experiences 
they  felt  were  related  to  their  activity  tracking.  We 
explicitly told participants to capture anything, big or small, 
that  they  thought  might  be  relevant  to  help  us  understand 
their  particular  experiences  of  using  an  activity  tracker. 
Participants were asked to send photos via e-mail to the first 
author  once  a  week  and  were  encouraged  to  also  include 
one  or  two  sentences  describing  the  photo  or  any  thoughts 
they might like to share, but this was not compulsory.  

The  second  phase  of  the  study  lasted  for  five  months  with 
occasional  checking  in  with  participants.  We  responded  to 
each photo we received, sometimes with a simple thank you 
and  sometimes  with  a  few  follow-up  questions,  depending 
on the content. If we had not heard from participants in two 
weeks they would get an individually tailored follow-up e-
mail. At the end of the study, participants had sent a total of 
313 photos, ranging from 4-125 photos per participant, with 
a median of 8 photos (see Table 1). Our initial reaction was 
that  the  median  number  of  photos  was  too  low.  This 
perhaps  had  to  do  with  how  often  we  sent  reminders  and 
how these were designed. Yet even with just a few photos 
the  follow-up  interviews  proved  very  fruitful.  We  will 
address  this  issue  in  more  detail  later  in  the  paper.  In  the 
third and final phase of the study, we conducted follow-up 
interviews.  In  preparation  for  these  interviews,  we  printed 
out  all  of  the  photos  participants  had  sent  throughout  the 
second  phase.  For  each  participant  we  also  developed  a 
follow-up  interview  guide,  noting  items  that  were  left 
unclear  from  the  first  interview  or  from  the  photos  and  e-
mails.  

The  follow-up  interview  had  a  three-part  design.  First, 
participants  were  asked  to  go  through  the  photos  they  had 
sent one by one, and explain what was in the photo and why 
they took the photo. This often sparked long reflections and 
explanations,  where  only  a  few  clarifying  questions  were 
needed.  Most  of  the  time  participants  addressed  questions 
in  the  follow-up  interview  guide  before  they  were  done 
explaining  the  photos  without  prompting.  Once  all  photos 
had  been  discussed,  participants  were  asked  to  complete  a 
sorting  task  by  looking  at  all  of  their  photos  together  and 
identifying  any  patterns.  For  example,  participants  were 
asked  whether 
represented  different 
experiences, or whether some of them might fit together in 
certain  categories.  For  example,  one  participant  explained 
that her photos could be categorized as before, during, and 
after,  exercise  sessions.  This  led  to  a  broader  range  of 
considerations,  as  she  saw  her  own  activity  tracking 
practice from a new perspective.  

their  photos 

Session: Tracking Activity & HealthCSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA1353Device*	

125	
0	
4	
8	

Photo
s	sent	
6	

Table	1.	Participant	information	
Age	 Occupation	
Parti-
cipant	
P1F	(N)	
P2F	(N)	
P3M	(N)	
P4M	(N)	
P5F	(N)	
P6F	(N)	
P7M	(N)	
P8M	(N)	
P9F	(N)	
P10F	(O)	
P11F	(O)	
P12F	(O)	
P13F	(O)	
P14M	(O)	
P15M	(O)	
P16F	(O)	
P17M	(O)	
P18F	(C)	
P19F	(C)	
P20F	(C)	
P21M	(C)	
P22F	(C)	
P23M	(C)	
P24M	(C)	
P25F	(C)	
F=  female,  M=  Male.  (N)=  New  tracker  received,  (O)=  Occasional 
use  at  start  of  study.  (C)=  Continuous  use  at  start  of  study.                   
** Switched device during study. Strikethroughs indicate participants 
that left the study before follow-up. 

Student	
Student	
Software	develop	
Store	manager	
Import	manager	
Engineer	
Music	teacher	
Carpenter	
Nurse	
Student	
App	developer	
Consultant	
Office	assistant	
PhD	student	
Store	manager	
Civil	engineer	
Dept.	manager	
Student	
Teacher	
Health	Care	Wrk	
IT	consultant	
Text	writer	
Office	adm.	
Machine	engineer	
Finance	

Fitbit	Flex	
Fitbit	Flex	
Fitbit	Flex	
Fitbit	One	
Fitbit	Flex	
Fitbit	One	
Fitbit	One	
Fitbit	Flex	
Fitbit	One	
Garmin	
Fitbit	Flex**	
Jawbone	UP	
Fitbit	Surge	
Jawbone	UP	
Suunto	
Polar	
Fitbit	Surge	
Fitbit	Surge	
Garmin	Vivofit	
Fitbit	Flex	
Fitbit	Charge	
Fitbit	Flex**	
Garmin	Vivofit	
Fitbit	Surge	
Fitbit	Charge	

21	
22	
27	
31	
34	
38	
42	
45	
50	
25	
28	
28	
31	
33	
39	
40	
47	
25	
26	
39	
40	
41	
41	
54	
57	

12	
9	
16	
5	
7	
5	
10	
10	
8	
6	
16	
21	
8	
8	
4	
8	
12	

This  interaction  sparked  reflections  at  a  broader  level, 
looking  across  one-off  uses  and  often  led  to  a  wider  range 
of considerations. Finally, participants were asked to reflect 
upon  their  experience  of  participating  in  the  study  as  a 
whole.  All  interviews  were  transcribed  and  then  coded 
using  the  TAMSanalyzer  tool.  Research  notes  and  email 
correspondence  with  participants  from  the  whole  research 
period were also included in the analysis.  

EXPERIENCES FROM RUNNING THE STUDY 
In 
the  following  sections  we  discuss  our  research 
experience by detailing first the particular benefits and then 
the  challenges  we  encountered  as  we  conducted  this 
participant-driven photo elicitation study.  

Benefits from photo elicitation methods 

1. Familiar medium made sign-up barrier low 
Even  though  all  participants  had  experience  taking  photos 
with  their  own  cameras,  they  had  different  ideas  about 
taking  photos  and  different  habits.  To  some  taking  photos 
was already related to physical activity. For example, P10F 
often took photos as part of her running, sometimes posting 
these  on  her  Endomondo  account,  which  she  associated 
with her tracking practices. On the other hand, we also had 
participants  who  did  not  use  their  cameras  often:  “I’m  not 
good  at  photos,  that’s  not  something  I  usually  do”  (P22F, 
follow-up  interview).  Throughout  the  study  we  reminded 
participants that photos did not have to be “good” but rather 
needed  to  convey  some  experience  or  thought  they  had. 

Participants were also welcome to send screen shots, if they 
felt that described something they had experienced. Even if 
some participants did not see themselves as “good at taking 
photos,” the design of our study allowed for a broad range 
of  participants  to  contribute  to  the  study.  For  example,  we 
noticed  that  those  that  sent  few  photos  sometimes  added 
more  detailed  text  explanations  in  the  email.  This  design 
also  appealed  to  those  who  might  decline  to  participate  in 
other types of studies: “(…) if you had asked me to send a 
report every week, and then it has to answer these 7 bullet 
points and attach a photo, in that case I think it would have 
been  too  much  work  (…),  where  this  has  more  been  just 
using  it  and  then  sensing  how  you  use  it”  (P5F,  follow-up 
interview).  Even  though  participants  had  prior  habits  of 
taking photos, using the camera in their phone required no 
set-up or introduction, which meant that there was no initial 
hurdle to overcome for participating in the study.  

2. Uncertainty about an open task lead to reflection 
Even  though  the  medium  was  familiar,  the  act  of  taking 
photos for a research study was new to the participants. As 
the study was exploratory in nature we had intentionally left 
the task open. Perhaps because of this new context and the 
very  open  task,  we  noticed  that  some  participants  were 
often  tentative.  Our  participant-driven  photo  elicitation 
method created a situation where research participants were 
not able to easily tell what would be the correct and socially 
desirable  fulfillment  of  the  task  at  hand.  This  became 
obvious  when  towards  the  end  of  the  follow-up  interview 
many participants asked how others had solved the task.  

Some  participants  sent  very  similar  photos  throughout  the 
study. Initially, we worried that this might give us too little 
insight,  rather  than  the  broad  perspective  we  were  hoping 
for.  However,  Clark-Ibáñez  highlights  how  one  of  the 
children in her study had taken 38 photos of her new kitten, 
and  she  dreaded  the  interview.  How  could  anything 
important arise from so many similar photos? It turned out 
that  the  kitten  was  particularly  important  to  this  child, 
because  she  had  recently  moved  to  a  new  area,  and 
conversations  about  the  kitten  revealed  many  important 
insights  about  her  living  situation,  the  family’s  economic 
conditions,  etc.  As  such,  “the  kitten  was  not  just  a  kitten” 
[5].  We  therefore  did  not  put  restrictions  on  how  many 
photos of the same type participants could send and we did 
not  comment  on  that  similarity  in  email  exchanges.  By 
design we did not give participants a specific task to solve, 
but  left  the  choice  of  what  to  capture  open.  Even  though 
such an open task created uncertainty it also allowed space 
for  individuality  and  for  reflection  on  personal  use  of 
activity  tracking  devices.  Some  participants  explained  that 
one  particular  challenge  had  been  to  capture  episodes  of 
“non-use”. This was especially so for novice users who lost 
interest in the device, or for episodic users. Yet their photos 
reflected  creative  ways  of  still  capturing  this,  which  led  to 
detailed  explanations  and  discussions  of  these  non-use 
episodes during follow up interviews.  

Session: Tracking Activity & HealthCSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA1354	
		
		
		
you need to answer and it takes 8 minutes of you work day 
and  then  you  have  to  answer  all  sorts  of  things  where  you 
don’t  feel  it  fits  to  your  situation  (…)”  (P16F,  Follow-up 
interview).  P16F  and  her  partner  both  participated  in  the 
study,  but  had  not  been  particularly  active  with  sending 
photos  (10  for  both  of  them  combined).  Both  had  found  it 
challenging  to  decide  what  to  capture.  Even  so,  she 
explained: “Generally, I would say this has started a lot of 
thoughts,  to  be  a  part  of  this,  we’ve  often  discussed  what 
you can use them (trackers) for and where the development 
is going” (P16F, follow-up interview).  

The  initial  idea  for  instructing  participants  to  write  a 
sentence or two about their photos was meant to be purely a 
clarification  of  the  content  of  the  photo  for  the  researcher. 
to  photos  gave  some 
text 
However,  adding  some 
participants an opportunity to describe something that they 
simply  could  not  find  a  way  to  capture  in  a  photo.  It  also 
opened up for some participants to describe the challenges 
they were facing when they were not sending photos. P17M 
explained in an email without a photo enclosed: “I’ve been 
racking my brain as to what I should write about (and take 
a  photo  of).  But  this  time  I  am  blank.  Maybe  the  message 
this  time  around  is  that  life  and  existence  is  extremely 
everyday like at the moment, and that therefore there’s not 
so  much  focus  on  pulse,  steps,  calories,  etc.  But  there  will 
be  soon,  when  Christmas  is  over  and  the  weight  scale 
comes out” (P17M, e-mail). This quote itself gave us much 
to  think  about  because  Christmas  time  is  not  at  all 
“extremely everyday like” in Denmark, filled as it is with a 
myriad  of  social  and  celebration  events  throughout  the 
month of December for most residents. This is highlighted 
by  the  statement  that  “the  weight  scale  comes  out”  when 
Christmas is over. Instead, this is an indication of episodic 
use – the context when “there’s not so much focus on pulse, 
steps,  calories,  etc.”  (P17M,  e-mail).  Such  reflections  and 
explanations became critical for our understanding of lapses 
of  use  and  episodes  of  life  when  less  attention  is  paid  to 
health data, even without a photo. As researchers, we found 
that we learned a great deal, not only from the photos, but 
also  from  instances  where  participants  struggled  to  take 
photos.  In  this  example,  P17M  had  been  tracking  various 
aspects  of  his  health  for  a  very  long  time,  and  could  have 
been  categorized  as  someone  who  really  had  activity 
tracking  deeply  integrated  into  his  everyday  practices.  Yet 
in the “extremely everyday” moment in his life, as he put it, 
activity tracking is not included.  

it  difficult 

P21M  explained  how  he  had  found 
to 
photograph  how  he  used  the  device.  As  he  explained:“I 
don’t really use it to say I’ve been out walking in the forest 
this day, or now I’ve walked 10km, so in that way it’s been 
a  bit  difficult”.  He  then  reflected  on  the  study  and 
elaborated “I think it’s been great that the task has been so 
open, because that makes you more aware of what you are 
doing, and what it’s like” (P21M, Follow-up interview). 

Figure 1: Examples of photos of non-
use. Clockwise from top-left P6F, 
P14M, P20F, P12F 

The  photos  in  Fig.  1  show  examples  of  non-use.  The  top-
left  photo  allowed  P6F  to  describe  the  paradoxical  feeling 
of wearing the Fitbit, but due to medical reasons not being 
able  to  do  much  physical  activity,  thus  not  “using”  the 
Fitbit  even  though  she  wore  it.  P14M  took  a  photo  of  the 
bowl in his entrance hall where the tracker inevitably ended 
up. He explained that seeing the device in the bowl he was 
forced to consider what he actually gained from wearing it, 
eventually  deciding  to  leave  it  behind.  P20F  (bottom-left) 
was annoyed she had forgotten to wear the tracker to work 
on  a  busy  day  and  felt  the  walking  she  had  done  was 
somehow  “lost”.  P12F  in  contrast  wanted  to  wear  a  watch 
she had gotten as a graduation present. She explained how 
she saw her Jawbone more as a ‘usable object,’ whereas her 
watch  was  more  aesthetically  pleasing.  These  photos 
the  very  different  ways  participants 
demonstrated 
experience  non-use,  and  allowed  us  to  discuss  non-use 
more directly in interviews.  

Wearing  an  activity  tracker  can  at  times  be  demanding. 
Fulfilling  the  pre-set  goals  of  activity  levels  can  require 
changes  in  ones  life,  reminding  users  of  failing  to  reach 
their goals even in situations where there is little room to do 
anything  about  it.  Not  wearing  the  devices  surfaced  as  a 
way to retain a feeling of control, to not be reminded of low 
activity  levels  in  times  when  this  was  difficult  to  change 
(for  example  due  to  work  or  family).  Supported  by  the 
photos  participants  explained  what  we  understood  as 
strategies  for  making  the  trackers  effectively  empowering. 
For  many  participants  increasing  activity  levels  required 
more  than  merely  taking  more  steps  every  day.  We  found 
that photo-driven narratives of non-use were crucial to our 
understanding  of 
these  offered 
opportunities  to  discuss  the  rich  diversity  of  practices 
around tracking devices.  

these  strategies  as 

3. Struggles of what to capture led to individual insights 
In  the  follow  up  interviews,  several  participants  noted  that 
even though they found photos more challenging than other 
types  of  research  participation,  they  appreciated  that  the 
photos helped them reflect on their own use of the device. 
For  example,  P16F  compared  the  experience  of  being  in 
this study to other types of studies: “Don’t we all know this 
thing where (consultant company) has developed something 

Session: Tracking Activity & HealthCSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA1355 
 
 
 
 
 
that 

nice 

Figure  2:  Example  of 
photos  sent  by  P21M.  “It 
even 
was 
someone 
like  me,  who 
doesn’t use the tracker for 
training  purposes  could 
tell about it, and what you 
for  besides 
can  use 
exercise, 
focusing 
exercise, 
exercise” 
(P21M).  

it 
on 

Thus  participants  were  challenged,  and  offered  an 
opportunity, to consider their activity tracking practices in a 
new way and explain it in their own terms. In this way, the 
research process became an exploration of the patterns and 
meanings  of  participant’s  own  activity  tracking  practices, 
done in collaboration with the researchers.   

4. Following experiences and attitudes over time  
Activity  tracking  is  often  emotionally  charged  [23].  The 
five month length of the study and its open format seemed 
to make participants feel confident and comfortable enough 
to express deeply felt worries and concerns both via e-mail 
and  during  the  follow-up  interview.  We  believe  several 
factors  such  as:  the  extended  period  of  time  of  the  study, 
direct feedback from the researchers whenever a photo was 
sent,  and  the  fact  that  the  follow  up  interview  was  clearly 
grounded  in their own experiences rather than researcher’s 
prepared questions, may have influenced this.  

For  example,  P17M  had  noticed  some  irregularities  in  his 
body,  and  had  been  worried  for  two  weeks  that  this  might 
be  a  sign  of  something  being  very  wrong.  He  finally 
convinced himself to see a doctor, and found out that there 
was  nothing  to  worry  about  two  weeks  later.  This  is  when 
we  received  a  photo  of  his  pulse  measurements.  In  the 
email accompanying the photo P17M explained:  

“When you receive this photo of the 
it’s 
pulse  measurement 
days 
because 
evening 
I  Monday 
discovered  that  my  almost-resting-
pulse  (the  one  I  see  when  I  have 
been  laying  on  the  couch  watching 
TV)  had  fallen  with  about  10  beats 
per  minute.  That’s  when  I  realized 
how much I have stressed myself out 
the last couple of weeks” (P17M, e-
mail).  

Figure 3: showing the lowered pulse (P17M) 

In  the  same  e-mail  he  expressed  doubts  of  whether  he 
should describe this episode at all, as he wasn’t sure he felt 
it  was  relevant  to  us  as  researchers:  “I  don’t  know  if  you 
can use it for anything, but at least it’s been 4 weeks where 
the tracker played a role above the usual” (P17M, e-mail). 
He  then  explained  in  detail  how  the  episode  made  him 
reflect on the use of his tracker in a particular way: “It may 
be  that  a  tracker,  in  all  reality,  might  just  not  be  a  good 
invention  for  someone  like  me,  that  is,  at  least  not  when  I 
had  an  experience  like  these  4  weeks.  But  then  again  it 
might be a good invention, when I then afterwards see the 
very  concrete  results  of  how  the  body’s  basic  pump  reacts 
when it is then allowed to relax again” (P17M, e-mail).  

from 

reaction 

immediate 

During  the  follow-up  interview,  we  once  again  discussed 
this experience, which meant that we were able to get both 
a  more 
the  e-mail,  and 
considerations after the episode had time to be processed. In 
the  follow-up  interview  P17M  practically  dismissed  the 
experience:  “I  self-diagnosed  completely,  and  that  was 
silly.”  In  this  later  reflection  he  explained  how  he  over-
reacted, while his initial e-mail revolved around the benefits 
of  tracking.  Having  him  explain  this  experience  as  it 
happened, but also following up some time later, allowed us 
to  note  this  change  in  attitudes  over  time.  By  using  photo 
elicitation  as  a  method  for  understanding  experiences  both 
as  they  occur  and  as  they  ‘sink  in’,  we  could  begin  to 
explore this. The fact that the activity tracker played a role 
for  P17M  in  this  situation  was  not  a  scenario  we  as 
researchers  might  have  imagined.  These  findings  allowed 
us  to  consider  the  ‘worried  well’,  a  concept  of  much 
concern in the health promotion literature [10,28]. This was 
possible  because  participant  driven  photo  elicitation 
allowed  us  to  follow  participants  long  enough  for  these 
worries  to  surface,  and  gives  us  an  opportunity  to  observe 
how these attitudes might change over time.  

5. Photo sorting task as a way to discuss absent images 
Similar  to  Frith  and  Harcourt  we  found  that  information 
was  not  necessarily  lost  even  if  not  all  experiences  were 
photographed, but only if participants were “encouraged to 
reflect on the research process and on images that may be 
absent from their collection” [9]. After all photos had been 
discussed,  the  participants  were  asked  to  look  across  their 
photos  and  consider  whether  they  themselves  could  see 
emerging patterns or categories and whether something was 
missing  from  this  overall  picture.  Often,  this  resulted  in 
broader  reflections  on  their  activity  tracking  behaviors.  In 
one case, P10F took out her phone and took a photo of the 
photographs sorted into piles on the table that had just been 
discussed in the interview. From the photos she discovered 
a  pattern  in  her  use  of  activity  tracking  device  and  her 
exercise pattern that she had not been aware of herself. As 
we concluded the interview she explained:  

Session: Tracking Activity & HealthCSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA1356 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“The most fun thing has kind of 
been seeing that you printed the 
photos  and  that  there’s  this 
before, 
after 
procedure.  That  was  more  than 
I  had  myself  thought  about.” 
(P10F, follow-up interview). 

during 

and 

Figure 4: 
Three categories of photos: Before, 
during and after exercise. P10F. 

As we were discussing whether photos fit into categories or 
represented  separate  experiences  P11F  explained:  “I  don’t 
know,  it’s  also  kind  of  funny,  I’ve  been  thinking  that  these 
photos I sent you were mostly sport so I actually don’t have 
these  small  ones  during  the  day,  I  haven’t  thought  about 
that. I have been thinking that I bought this watch for sports 
and  that’s  why  I  take  sports  photos  for  you”   (P11F, 
Follow-up  interview).  In  this  case,  as  P11F  looked  across 
her photos, she realized that her use of the activity tracking 
device  had  come  to  mean  more  to  her  in  the  everyday 
activities than she had initially anticipated. She realized this 
because  to  her  surprise  photos,  stories  and  memories  that 
were  unrelated  to  sports  events  kept  surfacing.  She  had 
bought  the  Apple  Watch  mainly  to  track  her  running  and 
exercise sessions, and thus thought of it mostly as a sports 
or  fitness  tracker.  In  P11F’s  case,  had  we  prompted  her  to 
reflect  on  her  use  via  survey  or  questionnaire,  she  would 
have perhaps answered with a starting point in her intended 
use. Had we done interviews without photo elicitation, she 
might  not  have  realized  that  using  the  tracker  in  her 
everyday  activities  actually  was  a  bigger  and  more 
pervasive  practice  than  she  had  previously  thought.  Thus 
allowing  participants  to  step  back  and  look  across  their 
experiences  opened  up  to  a  new  level  of  reflection  and 
findings.  Overall,  what  we  saw  was  that  participants  were 
processing  their  experiences  as  they  were  looking  at  the 
photos, both as they were sending them and as photos were 
discussed during the follow-up interview. The fact that the 
photos  so  clearly  sparked  new  insights  and  reflections  for 
the participants is a strong point of participant driven photo 
elicitation studies.  

they 

6. Participant-driven aspect led to substantial commitment 
received  a 
Whenever  participants  sent  photos 
personalized follow-up thank you e-mail, which sometimes 
included  short  follow-up  questions.  We  made  sure  to 
alternate  between  asking  follow-up  questions  and  simply 
their  e-mail. 
acknowledging 
Otherwise,  those  who  sent  photos  often  would  just  keep 
getting  more  questions,  which  could  deter  them  from 
sending more photos. This feedback loop gave us an idea of 
how  tracking  experiences  developed  over  time,  which  we 
were  able  to  explore  in  the  follow-up  interviews.  We 
believe that this feedback loop also ensured that the number 
of dropouts was very low. We had 25 participants, and out 

that  we  had 

received 

of  these  we  were  able  to  follow  up  with  23.  Two  were 
contacted  after  they  had  lost  their  devices  within  a  few 
weeks  of  the  beginning  of  the  study,  while  21  were 
interviewed  in  full  at  the  end  of  the  study.  Only  two 
participants never answered the invitation for the follow-up 
interview. Out of the participants who completed follow-up 
interviews,  several  expressed  that  they  had  enjoyed  trying 
to capture their experiences 
in photos. P9F explained:  

it 

could 

fun  doing 

be 
“Well 
motivating,  and  we  have 
had  some 
it, 
when we had to find a good 
motif, so this photo with the 
red  jacket,  I  am  actually 
not  walking  at  all,  I  am 
standing  still  actually  and 
we  had  some  great  laughs 
(P9F, 
that” 
because  of 
follow-up interview). 

Figure 5: P9F depicting an evening walk. 

Despite  the  fact  that  the  photo  in  Fig.  5  was  posed,  the 
image  enabled  us  to  discuss  the  social  experience  of 
walking  and  the  role  activity  tracking  played  in  this 
practice.  We  had  hoped  that  participants  would  find  it 
interesting to capture their experiences by using photos. Yet 
our design had an unexpected side effect. Frequent contact 
in  the  form  of  thank  you  and  follow  up  emails  strongly 
signaled to the participants that this study was important to 
us. P24M explained: “I think that this way you are doing it, 
I  mean,  there  are  many  who  just  send  out  an  electronic 
questionnaire  and  then  it’s  like,  this  is  more  a  testament 
that  you  want  to  get  more  in-depth  with  this”  (P24M, 
follow-up interview). The very open structure of the photo 
elicitation  task  demonstrated  to  the  participants  that  we 
were  deeply  committed  and  very  much  interested  in  their 
particular  experiences,  with  participants  trying  hard  to 
convey those experiences to us. This resulted in a relatively 
high level of commitment in study participation.   

Challenges of using photo elicitation methods  
As  we  conducted  the  study  we  also  faced  specific 
challenges worth considering for future studies. 

1. A range of interpretations of appropriateness 
The  relative  lack  of  structure  to  the  longitudinal  task  of 
taking photos that might have something to do with activity 
tracking  had  many  benefits  as  described  above.  Yet  it also 
had  one  significant  drawback.  Because  the  task  was  open, 
participants  chose  different  strategies,  varying  from  a  very 
narrowly  focused  to  what  we  call  a  “catch  all”  strategy. 
Many  participants  tended  to  focus  on  the  tracking  device 
itself,  but  sometimes  other  apps  or  devices  became 
important in relation to activity tracking practices. This was 
not  always  evident  from  the  photos,  but  came  up  in  the 
follow-up interviews. For example P18F used LifeSum, an 

Session: Tracking Activity & HealthCSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA1357 
 
 
app  in  which  she  tracked  her  food  intake.  This  would 
automatically feed into her use of the Fitbit, and be a part of 
how she used her tracking device. However, throughout the 
study she did not send any photos of LifeSum. We realized 
that  participants  may  have  been  so  focused  on  the  tracker 
itself that other related apps or devices were not so much in 
focus, and thus they would not send photos of these. Yet as 
we discussed the photos these practices surfaced ensuring a 
fuller  picture  of  the  ecology  of  tracking  devices  and 
systems  that  participants  used.  For  other  studies  that  are 
exploratory of nature it might be beneficial to emphasize to 
participants that not only the device (or whatever might be 
the  focus  of  the  study),  but  any  related  or  supporting 
technologies  might  be  of  interest,  and  that  they  would  be 
welcome  to  reflect  on  the  use  of  those  too.  In  contrast,  at 
least one participant had chosen a more “catch all” strategy, 
which  meant  that  by  the  end  of  the  study  he  had  sent  125 
photos. During his interview he explained how he had both 
sent photos that he had taken because he was in the study, 
but he also sent photos he had taken anyway, and these did 
not  necessarily  say  anything  about  his  activity  tracking 
experiences.  This  made  the  follow-up  interview  quite 
challenging:  

“Yes, photo nr. 37 is a photo of an 
egg. 
that’s 
I  wonder  what 
supposed  to  mean…  It’s  at  my 
parents’  place  because  I  can  see 
it’s my sister sitting there with the 
egg.  And  then  this  is  also  a  photo 
from  my  parents’  place  where  we 
card  game”  
are  playing  a 
interview).  
(P3M, 
Figure 6: Photo, P3M. 

follow-up 

Here  the  interview  drifted  very  far  from  what  we  had 
expected.  This  does,  however,  serve  as  an  example  of  the 
potential of participant-driven photo elicitation methods. In 
the  first  interview,  P3M  was  challenging  to  interview 
because  he  was  not  as  outspoken  as  others.  Our  first 
interview  with  P3M  lasted  only  32  minutes,  whereas  most 
of  the  other  interviews  took  an  hour  or  more.  P3M  would 
give  short  answers  and  not  elaborate  much,  even  with 
prompting. It was therefore surprising to us that the second 
interview  with  him  was  one  of  the  longest  follow-up 
interviews  in  our  entire  study,  lasting  approximately  1.5 
hours,  with  P3M  talking  uninterrupted  for  long  periods  of 
time,  explaining  his  photos  and  his  experiences  with  the 
tracker.  Here 
the  photos  acted  as  “a  medium  of 
communication  between  researcher  and  participant”  [5]. 
P3M  enjoyed  explaining  his  photos,  and  the  follow-up 
interview using the photos was a very different experience 
from  the  short,  and  at  times  awkwardly  silent,  initial 
engagement.  In  the  second  interview  P3M  felt  more  on 
“home turf” because of the photos. His own life included a 
great  many  experiences:  visiting  his  parents,  concerts,  a 
book  club,  etc.  While  not  all  of  this  will  be  interesting  or 
directly  used  in  our  analysis,  it  made  P3M  comfortable 

enough with the situation to also significantly elaborate on 
activity tracking experiences.  

As  such,  while  we  as  researchers  were  eager  to  focus  on 
activity  tracking,  it  took  patience  to  let  participants  decide 
which  of  their  experiences  to  share  and  let  the  stories 
unfold. This might entail sidetracks and background stories. 
Yet these are experiences that provide essential background 
knowledge often missing in other approaches. As such, the 
photo elicitation method makes it possible to gain valuable 
that  might  otherwise  be 
insights 
disregarded.  The  challenge  of  participant  driven  photo 
elicitation,  however,  is  to  let  the  stories  unfold  in  a  tempo 
set by the participant without getting drowned by irrelevant 
content. 

from  participants 

2. Recall and memory issues remain in longitudinal studies 
The longitudinal participant-driven photo elicitation design 
of  the  study  presented  many  important  benefits.  Yet  we 
caution  other  researchers  conducting  a  study  like  this 
against letting it go on much longer than five or six months. 
During  the  follow-up  interviews  five  months  later  we 
observed that participants had trouble remembering some of 
the  very  early  photos  and  explaining  why  they  had  sent 
them. In a few cases, the researcher had to read out loud the 
accompanying e-mail that had been sent with the photo, and 
the  participant  would  then  pick  up  on  that  and  describe 
some  their  original  intent  with  the  photo.  Although 
important  for  triggering  recall,  photos  alone  may  not  be 
enough to facilitate recall in longer studies. 

Only three of the nine participants who received a tracker at 
the  beginning  of  the  study  used  that  same  tracker  on  a 
regular  basis  at  the  end  of  the  study.  Thus  six  participants 
abandoned  use  of  their  trackers,  including  two  who  lost 
their trackers. P6F, for example, had quickly abandoned her 
new Fitbit tracker. Although we stayed in contact with P6F 
throughout  the  five  months  to  see  if  she  picked  up  the 
device again, the experience of tracking was not as present 
for her as it was for some participants who tracked a larger 
proportion  of  the  time  of  the  study.  Thus  the  follow-up 
interview was perhaps less useful. Instead of waiting to do 
the follow-up interview, we should have asked for an earlier 
follow-up,  and  then  kept  in  e-mail  contact  to  monitor  any 
changes  in  her  patterns  and  perhaps  conduct  yet  another 
interview at the end of the study.  

We  chose  to  end  the  study  after  5  months,  as  we  did  not 
want participants to grow tired or frustrated with the study. 
Identifying the right length of time for the photo elicitation 
stage and the frequency of interviews remains a challenge. 
In  the  future  we  plan  to  deploy  such  studies  for  shorter 
periods  of  photo-elicitation  and  to  iterate  several  times  to 
mitigate  recall  issues.  For  example,  we  might  conduct 
shorter  follow-up  interviews  monthly  during  a  five-month 
study  or  do  two  or  three  month  long  studies  several  times 
over the course of a year.  

Session: Tracking Activity & HealthCSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA1358 
3. Unobtrusive and easy to forget to take photos 
Taking photos with a mobile phone can be habitual. Some 
people  do  so  frequently  and  others  hardly  ever.  If 
photographing a situation was not something the participant 
would have otherwise done, bringing out the phone to take 
that  photo  was  hard  to  remember.  P19F  explained:  “So  I 
would think about it, but then when you are in the middle of 
it, you just forget it” (Follow-up interview). 

this  also  at 

times  resulted 

Our  hope  in  doing  photo  elicitation  study  was  to  gain 
insight  into  everyday  practices  with  minimal  intrusion. 
However, 
in  participants 
forgetting  to  either  take  photos  or  send  photos.  We  sent 
reminders every second week, if they had not sent a photo 
the previous week. While most participants felt this was an 
appropriate level of reminders, a few told us we could have 
reminded  them  more  often.  Future  studies  might  consider 
sending out more frequent reminders, or asking participants 
at the beginning of the study how often they would like to 
be reminded to send photos.  

these  devices” 

Towards  the  end  of  the  interview  we  discussed  with 
participants  whether  they  would  have  preferred  specific 
tasks  to  solve,  such  as  “take  a  photo  of  your  tracker  while 
you  are  at  work”.  P15M,  like  most  participants,  preferred 
not having set tasks: “So one could say that by asking us to 
do  specific  tasks  it  might  have  broken  the  rhythm  of  how 
you  would  usually  use 
(Follow-up 
interview).  Participants agreed that while giving them tasks 
would have made the job easier to get done, it would have 
not  as  clearly  represented  the  way  they  used  their  devices. 
“Well  this  is  100%  my  reality,  I  promise  you  that”  (P12F, 
Follow-up  interview).  In  any  study,  the  researcher  must 
decide  how  much  to  ask  of  the  participants,  and  often  this 
will come at a cost of how intrusive the study might be. In 
keeping the task open we made participants responsible for 
identifying  relevant  situations  and  generating  relevant 
content. The upside was that participants agreed this did not 
make  them  do  anything  out  of  their  routine,  but  we  could 
have gathered more photos if we had reminded participants 
more  often  or  given  them  more  structure.  Decisions  like 
these  depend  very  much  on  the  specific  goals  of  the  study 
and must be considered in any design. 

4. Expect discontinuity & technical difficulties 
Even  though  all  participants  owned  a  smartphone,  we 
encountered  minor  technical  problems  that  are  worth 
mentioning.  For  example,  writing  a  few  sentences  turned 
out to be important to some participants. However, writing 
longer  messages  on  smartphones  could  be  a  hassle.  One 
participant  had  some  problems  sending  photos  from  her 
phone  or  figuring  out  how  to  connect  to  her  computer  and 
send  photos  from  there  (she  eventually  did).  Additionally, 
some participants took photos but never sent those. Several 
participants sent forgotten photos during or after the follow-
up  interview,  but  it  is  likely  that  some  photos  never  came 
through,  and  some  thoughts  were  never  written  down.  We 
to  send 
recommend  clearly  encouraging  participants 

messages even when they were unfinished, and then remind 
them to fill out more detail later. Further, providing several 
different avenues for communication (perhaps a web-form, 
or even a phone app) can help mitigate such issues. Taken 
together,  these  technical  hitches  clearly  influenced  the 
number of photos we received.  

itself 

lends 

tracking 

inherently 

5. Self-presentation and self-censorship 
Asking participants to send photos of their experiences with 
activity 
to  subjective 
positioning  and  self-censorship.  For  example,  some 
participants  worried  their  photos  might  not  make  sense  to 
anyone  else,  and  thus  didn’t  send  them.  Some  participants 
explained  to  us  that  they  would  wait  until  they  had 
something  “really  interesting”  to  send  before  sending  it. 
The fact that participants were not really aware of what role 
exactly  photos  would  play  in  the  study  or  the  follow  up 
interviews  made  choosing  what  to  capture  challenging. 
Discussions  in  the  follow-up  interviews  demonstrated  how 
some  photos  were  clearly  driven  by  social  desirability. 
P20F, for example, who struggled to lose weight, explained 
about a photo of a breakfast she had cooked: 

 “I  think  this  (photo)  was  a 
day  where  I  was  thinking  I 
wanted to show you that I can 
actually 
healthily” 
live 
 (P20F, Follow-up interview).  

Figure 7: Photo, P20F. 

We  readily  admit  that  the  wish  to  engage  in  impression 
management has played a role in what participants chose to 
send us, and this self-censorship probably led some to send 
fewer  photos.  Yet  the  open  nature  of  the  original  photo-
elicitation task and the focus on the photos in the follow-up 
study resulted in many participants explaining that they had 
not  felt  judged  when  participating  in  this  study:  “In  this 
way  it’s  fine  and  comfortable  to  participate  because  there 
has been no finger pointing when I’ve shown my numbers” 
(P21M,  Follow-up  interview).  While  we  see  participants 
wanted  to  uphold  a  positive  self-image  and  present  that  to 
us, a careful design can allow for less “finger pointing.”  

DISCUSSION 
Research in the area of activity tracking, despite producing 
valuable  insights,  has  struggled  to  find  ways  to  study  the 
role tracking devices play in the everyday lives of people as 
use develops over weeks and months. This is a difficult nut 
to  crack  because  activity  tracking  devices  are  built  to  be 
unobtrusive,  with  only  occasional  moments  of  direct 
engagement.  For  this  reason,  photo  elicitation  methods 
might seem counterintuitive, explicitly drawing attention to 
a  technology  that  is  designed  to  be  overlooked.  However, 
we found that with this method we experienced a number of 
benefits. We were able to gain insights without making too 

Session: Tracking Activity & HealthCSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA1359 
 
 
 
interest 

researcher 

many  initial  assumptions  about  the  use  patterns  of  the 
participants,  which  is  difficult  to  avoid  in  survey  studies. 
Most  importantly,  the  method  turned  out  to  be  useful  as  a 
way to begin to understand “non-use” or episodic events or 
experiences  in  more  detail,  as  participants  found  creative 
ways  to  capture  this.  The  frequent  low-level  engagement 
with  the  researchers  through  email  became  a  genuine 
indication  of 
their  particular 
experiences,  which  resulted  in  a  very  low  dropout  rate, 
often  a  problem  in  other  types  of  longitudinal  studies.  We 
admit  that  participants’  self-censorship  might  have  led  to 
some  photos  not  being  sent.  However,  several  participants 
explained  that  they  felt  at  ease  and  willing  to  discuss  their 
practices  in  detail  in  interviews  that  took  a  direct  starting 
point in their own experiences and values. Thus participants 
revealed  a  great  deal  about  their  experiences,  even  such 
things as deeply felt worries of disease, struggling to loose 
weight  or  balance  stressful  workdays  with  being  an 
attentive parent. 

in 

Alongside the benefits clearly gained by the researchers, we 
observed  that  this  method  allowed  participants  themselves 
to reflect on their own use of their device at several points 
in  time.  We  believe  this  is  important,  and  has  not  been 
covered  by  research  methods.  Here  both  photo  elicitation 
and  the  follow-up  interview  essentially  became  part  of  the 
activity  tracking  process  for  our  participants.  For  five 
months  we  redirected  participant  attention  to  the  device  at 
the  follow-up 
least  every 
interview  we  staged  an  intense  experience  of  reflection  on 
participant  device  use  and  the  images  they  had  sent.  Our 
data  suggest  that  despite  the  device  being  designed  to 
essentially  disappear  and  become  unobtrusive  in  use, 
moments  of  reflection  on  its  use  and  its  function  may  be 
integral to productive activity tracking 

two  weeks.  Then,  during 

The  participant  driven  photo  elicitation  method  that  we 
have  demonstrated  here  draws  on  a  rich  tradition  across 
various fields, and can allow participants to “retain control 
over how and when they engage in the research” [9]. While 
this  makes  this  method  especially  suitable  for  researchers 
interested  in  collaborative  efforts,  our  application  of  this 
method  to  a  longitudinal  study  of  activity  tracking  devices 
proved fruitful. 

CONCLUSION & RECOMMENDATIONS 
This paper investigates the benefits and challenges of using 
participant  driven  photo  elicitation  method 
to  better 
understand activity tracking practices as these develop over 
days and months. Based on our experience in this study we 
make the following suggestions for researchers interested in 
replicating or adapting our methods. 

1.  Study  duration:  Despite 

the 

importance  of 

the 
longitudinal  design,  we  hesitate  to  recommend  any 
study  to  continue  longer  than  5-6  months  without 
following up on the photos. While photos support more 
specific  recall  this  effect  does  not  last  forever.  We 
suggest for future studies to have more, but shorter 

rounds  of  photo  elicitation.  For  example,  ask 
participants  to  take  photos  the  first  week  of  every 
month  and  then  follow  up  every  3-5  months.  This 
means that reminders to take photos should be adjusted 
accordingly;  shorter  iterations  of  photo  elicitation 
might  allow  for  more  reminders,  whereas  longer 
continuous  studies  should  be  careful  not  to  overload 
participants with reminders. 

2.  Photo  content:  It  is  important  to  remind  participants 
that photos do not have to be “good” and do not have 
to always feature the device itself. As long as the photo 
captures  some  element  of  the  experience,  ensure  that 
participants  understand  that  this  is  useful  in  the  study. 
Activity  tracker  use  practices  are  very  diverse  and 
these unobtrusive devices can come to play a role in a 
range of unexpected daily practices. Thus emphasis on 
particular 
counter-productive.  
Participants will at times struggle to figure out what to 
capture.  We  found  that  this  struggle  can  lead  to 
significant  insight  into  how  participants  figured  out 
what  they  themselves  found  to  pertain  to  activity 
tracking use.  

content 

can 

be 

4.  Follow  up 

3.  Allow  content  other  than  photos:  To  support 
reflection  and  to  gain  inside  into  the  breadth  of  daily 
practice  we  suggest  allowing  participants  to  include 
written  text  alongside  photos  but  not  requiring  it. 
To mitigate technical issues we recommend reminding 
participants  that  it  is  okay  to  write  keywords and  then 
come back to this at a later point and fill in more detail.  
their 
interviews  benefit  from 
departure  in  photos.  Interviewers  need  to  be  prepared 
that  follow-up 
the 
interests of the participant. Trying to steer the interview 
in  certain  predetermined  directions  leads  the  study 
away from the main point of photo elicitation, namely 
creating  a  space  for  participants  to  explain  about  their 
individual experiences. 

interviews  necessarily  follow 

taking 

5.  Sorting  task  is  key  to  reflection:  We  found  it  highly 
beneficial  to  include  a  sorting  task  in  the  follow-up 
interview.  In  this  exercise  participants  were  asked  to 
categorize  their  photos  as  they  saw  fit,  and  then  to 
explores  further  what  this  might  mean  to  them.  This 
task  generated  important  insights  for  the  researchers 
and also lead to thoughtful reflection on the part of the 
participants.  

Participant  driven  photo  elicitation  method  is  no  panacea 
for  all  studies  exploring  activity-tracking  in  practice. 
However, the method we describe here can be a useful tool 
by  itself  or  in  addition  to  other  methods  as  we  seek  to 
understand how consumers adopt, implement and push back 
on wearable activity tracking devices.   

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  thank  our  participants  and  gratefully  acknowledge  the 
time  and  effort  they  invested  in  this  study.  We  thank 
Daniela Rosner, Sean Munson, Christina Chung and Daniel 
Epstein for feedback on earlier versions of this paper. 

Session: Tracking Activity & HealthCSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA1360REFERENCES 
1.  Elena Agapie, Daniel Avrahami, and Jennifer Marlow.  

16.  Douglas Harper. 2002. Talking about pictures: A case 

for photo elicitation. Visual Studies 17, 1. 

2016. Staying the Course: System-Driven Lapse 
Management for Supporting Behavior Change. 
CHI’16. 

2.  Kirsten Boehner, Janet Vertesi, Phoebe Sengers, and 
Paul Dourish. 2007. How HCI Interprets the Probes. 
CHI’07, 1077–1086. 

3.  Niall Bolger, Angelina Davis, and Eshkol Rafaeli. 
2003. Diary methods: Capturing life as it is lived. 
Annual Review of Psychology 54, 579–616. 

4.  Scott Carter and Jennifer Mankoff. 2005. When 

Participants Do the Capturing: The Role of Media in 
Diary Studies. CHI’05 5, 899. 

5.  Marisol Clark-Ibáñez. 2004. Framing the Social World 

With Photo-Elicitation Interviews. American 
Behavioral Scientist 47, 12, 1507–1527. 

6. 

James Clawson, Jessica A. Pater, Andrew D. Miller, 
Elizabeth D. Mynatt, and Lena Mamykina. 2015. No 
Longer Wearing: Investigating the Abandonment of 
Personal Health-Tracking Technologies on Craigslist. 
UbiComp’15. 

7.  Daniel A. Epstein, Jennifer Kang, Laura R. Pina, James 
Fogarty, and Sean A. Munson. 2016. Reconsidering the 
Device in the Drawer: Lapses as a Design Opportunity 
in Personal Informatics. UbiComp ’16. 

8.  Daniel A. Epstein, An Ping, James Fogarty, and Sean 

Munson. 2015. A Lived Informatics Model of Personal 
Informatics. UbiComp ’15. 

9.  Hannah Frith and Diana Harcourt. 2007. Using 

Photographs to Capture Women’s Experiences of 
Chemotherapy: Reflecting on the Method. Qualitative 
Health Research 17, 10, 1340–1350. 

10.  Maxine Frith. 2014. Are you one of the rising numbers 

of the “worried well”? The Telegraph. 

11.  Thomas Fritz, Elaine Huang, Gail Murphy, and 

Thomas Zimmermann. 2014. Persuasive Technology in 
the Real World: A Study of Long-Term Use of Activity 
Sensing Devices for Fitness. CHI ’14, 487–496. 

12.  George Gaskell. 2000. Individual and group 

interviewing. In Qualitative researching with text, 
image and sound. SAGE, 38–56. 

13.  Bill Gaver, Tony Dunne, and Elena Pacenti. 1999. 

Cultural Probes. Interactions 6, 1, 21–29. 

14.  Andrea Grimes and Desney Tan. 2009. Toward 

technologies that support family reflections on health. 
GROUP’09, 311–320. 

15.  Teena Hammond. 2014. Wearables have a dirty little 
secret: 50% of users lose interest. TechRepublic.Com. 
http://tek.io/1doKGVt 

17.  Willem Horst, Ties Bunt, Stephan Wensveen, and Lisa 
Cherian. 2004. Designing probes for empathy with 
families. Proc. Dutch directions in HCI, 15. 

18.  Amanda Lazar, Joshua Tanenbaum, Christian Koehler, 

and David H. Nguyen. 2015. Why We Use and 
Abandon Smart Devices. UbiComp’15. 

19.  Emily Levy. 2014. The Dirty Business of Gaming 

Wearable Fitness Gadgets. Vocative. 
http://www.vocativ.com/money/business/dirty-
business-gaming-wearable-fitness-gadgets/ 

20.  Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A stage-

based model of personal informatics systems. CHI’10, 
557. 

21.  T. A. Loeffler. 2004. A Photo Elicitation Study of the 
Meanings of Outdoor Adventure Experiences. Journal 
of Leisure Research 36, 536–557. 

22.  Brian J. McNely. 2013. Visual research methods and 
communication design. SIGDOC ’13, 123–132. 

23.  John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, and Matthew Chalmers. 

2014. Personal Tracking as Lived Informatics. CHI’14, 
1163–1172. 

24.  Minna Ruckenstein. 2014. Visualized and Interacted 
Life: Personal Analytics and Engagements with Data 
Doubles. Societies 4, 1. 

25.  Ross B. Steinman. 2008. Projective Techniques in 
Consumer Research. Northeastern Association of 
Business, Economics, and Technology, 253–261. 

26.  Lucy Suchman. 2007. Human-Machine 

Reconfigurations. Plans and Situated Actions. 
Cambridge University Press. 

27.  Technology Advice. 2014. Wearable Technology and 
Preventative Health: Trends in Fitness Tracking 
Among U.S. Adults.  

28.  Kirsty Walker. 2010. NHS “wasting millions on 

treating the worried well.” MailOnline. 

29.  Justyna Wijas-Jensen. 2014. It-anvendelse i 
befolkningen 2014. Danmarks Statistik. 

30.  Jill Palzkill Woelfer. 2010. Trouble-spotting 

Photoshows: Capturing Everyday HCI Experiences. 
CHI’10, 3367. 

31.  Daniel B. Wright and George D. Gaskell. 1998. 
Surveying Memory Processes: Introduction. In 
Memory. Taylor & Francis Group. 

32.  Zhen Yue, Eden Litt, Carrie J. Cai, et al. 2014. 

Photographing Information Needs: The Role of Photos 
in Experience Sampling Method-Style Research. 
CHI’14, 1545–1554.  

Session: Tracking Activity & HealthCSCW 2017, February 25–March 1, 2017, Portland, OR, USA1361 
 
 
 
