Pass the Ball: Enforced Turn-Taking in Activity Tracking 

John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, Matthew Chalmers 
School of Computing Science, 
University of Glasgow, UK. 
{firstname.lastname}@glasgow.ac.uk 

ABSTRACT 
We  have  developed  a  mobile  application  called  Pass  The 
Ball  that  enables  users  to  track,  reflect  on,  and  discuss 
physical  activity  with  others.  We  followed  an  iterative 
design  process,  trialling  a  first  version  of  the  app  with  20 
people  and  a  second  version  with  31.  The  trials  were 
conducted  in  the  wild,  on  users’  own  devices.  The  second 
version of the app enforced a turn-taking system that meant 
only  one  member  of  a  group  of  users  could  track  their 
activity  at  any  one  time.  This  constrained  tracking  at  the 
to 
individual 
communicate  and  interact  with  each  other.  We  discuss  the 
second  trial  with  reference  to  two  concepts:  social-
relatedness and individual-competence. We discuss six key 
lessons  from  the  trial,  and  identify  two  high-level  design 
implications:  attend  to  “practices”  of  tracking;  and  look 
within and beyond “collaboration” and “competition” in the 
design of activity trackers.      

level,  but  more  successfully 

led  users 

Author Keywords: 
Activity Tracking; Mobile Health; Game.  

ACM Classification Keywords  
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 

INTRODUCTION 
The  potential  for  smartphone-based  activity  trackers  to 
support and encourage health related behaviour change has 
been  widely  recognised  (see  [14,  16,  18]  for  recent 
overviews).  We  have  noticed  that  activity  trackers  are 
commonly  designed  as  individual  trackers  that  then  have 
social  features  added  to  them.  Typically,  social  features 
enable users to post an achievement such as a recent run or 
step-count to a social network site such as Facebook. In this 
paper  we  explore  a  social-first  approach,  reporting  on  an 
app we have developed and evaluated that takes interacting 
with others as prerequisite to tracking an activity. The app, 
Pass  The  Ball,  is  a  team  game  in  which  players  pass  a 
virtual ball to each other. Only one user can have the ball at 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  

CHI 2015, April 18 - 23 2015, Seoul, Republic of Korea Copyright is held 
by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3145-6/15/04...$15.00  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702577 

any one time, and only this user’s activity can be tracked by 
the  app  (the  app  awards  activity  points  based  on  a  simple 
motion  tracking  algorithm).  Teams  compete  against  each 
other  to  score  the  most  points.  This  creates  a  coordination 
problem, one that requires users to think about and discuss 
not just their own activity but also that of others. 

For  this  work  we  adopted  a  “research  through  design” 
approach  (see  [13,  36]).  We  have  created  a  mobile 
application and have studied its use in the wild on people’s 
own  mobile  phones.  We  have  gone  through  this  process 
iteratively (as is best practice in design [36]), producing and 
trialling the app for two weeks, then refining it and trialling 
it  again  for  another  two  weeks.  Gaver  [13]  argues  that 
research  through  design  is  not  about  creating  artefacts  that 
embody, confirm or falsify theory, but artefacts that can be 
“annotated”  by  theory.  In  this  paper  we  use  two  concepts 
from  behaviour  change  theory  as  annotation:  individual 
competence  and  social  relatedness.  Our  work  does  not 
embody, confirm or falsify any particular theory, but treats 
these  concepts  as  a  way  of  discussing  the  relationship, 
similarities  and  differences  of  Pass  The  Ball  to  other 
activity  trackers.  Gaver  views  design  not  as  a  science,  but 
as  a  process  in  which  “we  may  build  on  one  another’s 
results, but … also usefully subvert them” (p.946). Our app 
is  subversive  in  that  it  prioritises  social-relatedness  over 
individual-competence, where the converse is the norm. 

BACKGROUND 
Pedometers  have  been  widely  available  for  a  long  time 
(they  were  introduced,  in  their  modern  form  as  step 
counters,  by  Yamasa  in  the  1960s).  Recently,  smartphone 
applications  (apps)  and  networked  hardware  devices  have 
begun  to  offer  new  possibilities  for  tracking  steps  and 
myriad  other  activities,  sparking  renewed  interest  in  the 
relationship  between  tracking  and  health  related  behaviour 
change.  Pedometers  have  been  shown  to  have  a  positive 
effect  on  health  related  behaviour  [34],  and  it  seems  a 
reasonable  expectation  that  apps  and  networked  hardware 
devices  can  have  similar  if  not  greater  benefits.  Studies 
such  as  [3,  4]  are  pointing  to  and  cautiously  confirming 
such benefits. However, with the range of new possibilities 
comes a large, complex design space; it is only beginning to 
become  clear  what  the  effects  and  relevancies  of  different 
designs  are  to  behaviour  change.  In  this  paper  we  discuss 
our exploration of this design space. 

Over  the  last  few  years,  researchers  and  developers  have 
been creating apps and devices that augment tracking with 
social and game features. Apps such as SpyFeet [30] allow 

Experience Design for GamesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2417  
 
 
to  be  unlocked  and  quests 

stories 
to  be  achieved. 
Applications such as Fish n’ Steps [21], and Ubi-Fit Garden 
[8,  10]  reward  activity  with  badges  or  virtual  animals  and 
items.  Applications  such  as  Houston  [9]  StepStream  [25] 
and  Shakra  [1,  24]  allow  users  to  compare  activity  levels 
with others. Applications such as NEAT-o-Games [12] and 
American  Horse  Power  Challenge  [35,  26]  focus  more 
overtly  on  competition  with  users  competing  in  a  virtual 
race.  Commercial  activity  trackers,  including  smartphone 
applications such as Moves and Endomondo and hardware 
devices such as FitBit, Nike Fuelband and Jawbone UP also 
offer  a  range  of  functionality  including  tracking,  game 
features, and options to share data with others. In this paper 
we  will  use  the  term  “activity  tracking”  with  reference  to 
the quantification of physical movement.  

that 

Individual-Competence and Social-Relatedness 
There  are  many  theories  relevant  to  behaviour  change  [10, 
15, 33]. These commonly address the importance of gaining 
an understanding of one’s own behaviour and any necessary 
changes,  as  well  as  the  importance  of  social  support.  For 
example, Self Determination Theory (SDT) [29, 33], states 
that  persistent  behaviour  change  occurs  readily  when 
people 
three 
internalise  new  skills  and  values.  The 
internalisation  requires,  are 
psychological  needs 
competence,  relatedness  and  autonomy.  We  annotate  our 
study  with  respect  to  two  of  these.  As  is  common  in 
research studies, we have asked people to use a tracker (our 
app) for a short period, and have paid them to do so. SDT 
and  other  behaviour  change  theories  state  that  it  is 
important that activity is engaged in with a sense of choice 
and  personal  endorsement  (i.e.  with  autonomy).  Although 
we instructed participants to use the app as much or as little 
as  they  wanted,  there  are  subtle  pressures  involved  in 
recruiting  and  paying  participants,  and  ultimately  there  is 
little we can claim about autonomy, internalisation or long-
term  behaviour  changes.  Our  study  focuses  more  narrowly 
on individual-competence and social-relatedness over short 
term. This is a narrow treatment of the concepts, which are 
articulated  in  the  literature  not  just  with  respect  to  “early 
action” but also the medium and long term.  

Individual  competence  is  the  ability  to  understand  one’s 
own behaviour and whether and how to make changes [31]. 
To  be  competent  is  to  be  able  to  measure  or  otherwise 
conceptualise  an  activity,  and  to  be  able  to  recognise  and 
meet  sufficient  targets.  For  example,  pedometers  provide 
step  count  measurements,  and  can  be  used  in  conjunction 
with  relevant  goals.  Someone  may  have  little  idea  of  how 
many  steps  they  take  a  day  before  using  a  pedometer,  and 
should  they  find  they  are  taking  too  few,  an  appropriate 
short term goal might be a 10% increase, rather than to aim 
for  a  potentially  unobtainable  number  such  as  10,000.  In 
terms  of  competence,  activity  trackers:  enable  diverse 
activities  to  be  tracked;  provide  more  flexible  ways  to 
present  and  examine  data;  and  provide  ways  to  develop 
exercise regimes, set goals and remain motivated. 

Social-relatedness  refers  to  the  extent  to  which  one  feels 
understood  by,  supported  by,  respected  by  and  connected 
with others [31]. Social relatedness can manifest in various 
ways,  including:  going  through  a  change  with  others, 
having  social  support  from  family,  and  understanding  how 
you are placed generally within a population. One pertinent 
issue  to  be  raised  here  is  that  competition  can  be  de-
motivating,  particularly 
the 
competition.  Chen  and  Pu  [7]  have  shown  that  people  are 
more  motivated  by  a  cooperative  activity  tracker  app  than 
they are a competitive one. Regarding relatedness, modern 
activity  trackers  offer  many  opportunities  for  sharing, 
comparing,  competing  and  collaborating.  Community 
focused initiatives involving walk-a-thons or online forums 
in conjunction with tracking hardware (e.g. [30]) have often 
shown  greater  benefits  to  a  population  than  individualised 
approaches.  

regularly 

if  one 

loses 

Putting Social-Relatedness before Individual-Competence 
Social  features  in  activity  trackers  are  often  optional,  and 
typically  designed  for  sharing  and  comparing  data  about 
tracked  activity.  As  such,  social  relatedness  is  typically 
treated  in  design  as  subordinate  to  individual  competence. 
For example, running apps often enable users to track a run 
and afterwards to post data about it to a social network site. 
The  design  of  Pass  The  Ball  reverses  this,  putting  social-
relatedness before individual-competence; one must engage 
socially  before  tracking  activity.  This  is  a  re-ordering  of, 
rather  than  re-specification  of  design  features.  Consolvo  et 
al  [9]  list  design  requirements  that  include  “provide 
personal  awareness”  and  “support  social  influence”.  We 
meet  these  requirements,  but  in  reverse  order  and  with 
emphasis  on  the  latter  over  the  former.  Clearly  we  are 
making  generalisations  here  that  lump  together  diverse 
activity  trackers.  Some  trackers,  notably  StepStream  [24], 
strongly emphasise relatedness, but the work we present in 
this  paper  pushes 
to  an  extreme  by  making  social 
interaction prerequisite to tracking.  

PASS THE BALL 
We  have  developed  an  app  for  iOS  and  Android  devices 
called  Pass  The  Ball.  The  app  uses  the  accelerometers  in 
these devices in order to quantify a user’s physical activity. 
It  is  a  team  game  that  enforces  a  turn-taking  mechanism, 
requiring that only one team member can track their activity 
at any one time. Teams compete in a league. The Pass The 
Ball  interface  is  shown  in  figure  1.  It  has  three  tabs,  or 
views,  that  respectively  show  the  home  (main)  view,  the 
current  league  standings,  and  tools  to  set  preferences  for 
notifications and to update profile pictures. The app has the 
following functionality: 

•  When a user registers, they join a team. Each team has a 
virtual ball, which only one player on the team can have 
possession  of  at  any  one  time.  When  a  player  receives 
the  ball,  the  app  starts  tracking  that  player’s  activity. 
After  one  hour,  or  if  the  player  passes,  it  ceases 
tracking. Only the player with the ball has their activity 

Experience Design for GamesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2418tracked. The user with the ball can also pass the ball to 
any  other  user  on  their  team.  Passing  the  ball  switches 
off  tracking  on  the  passer’s  device  immediately.  When 
the receiver has accepted the pass, the receiver’s device 
begins tracking.  

•  The activity tracker is built into the app. It is based upon 
an  algorithm  defined  by  Libby  [20].  It  quantifies  steps 
or  any  other  moderate  or  vigorous  physical  movement 
(the word ‘steps’ is not used in the game, and as we will 
discuss, the participants scored points from a variety of 
physical  activities  including  shaking,  jumping,  and 
cycling).  A  user’s  activity,  as  quantified  by  the  app, 
contributes  to  the  team’s  overall  score.  Users  can  view 
their team’s score and the scores of other teams. Teams 
compete in a weekly league (see the right of figure 1).  

•  When  the  tracker  is  not  active,  players  can  take 
possession of the ball through interception. Interceptions 
incur a deduction of 1000 points from the team’s overall 
score.  This  is  possible  in  two  circumstances:  firstly,  if 
the  player  with  the  ball  has  used  the  tracker  for  the 
maximum  one  hour  period,  but  not  passed  the  ball  (in 
which case, every team member except the one with the 
ball has the option to intercept it); secondly, if a ball has 
been passed but the receiving player has not tapped the 
receive  button  (in  which  case  every  team  member 
except  the  pair  making  and  receiving  the  pass  has  the 
option to intercept it).  

•  Users can write comments in the app, which are visible 
to  all  other  team  members,  appearing  on  the  same 
timeline  that  shows  passing  and  activity  data.  Players 
are  able  to  view  the  activity  of  other  teams,  but  cannot 
view comments made by other teams. 

•  Team  activity  is  presented  in  the  app  on  a  scrollable 
timeline  (see  ‘The  Home  View’  in  figure  1).  The 
timeline is updated every time a comment is made, and 
every  time  the  state  of  the  ball  changes  (for  example 
when  a  pass  is  made,  when  the  tracker  is  turned  on,  or 
when  an  interception  is  possible).  When  a  player  turns 
on  their  tracker,  a  visualisation  of  their  activity  is 
displayed together with the points they have scored. The 
visualisations can be seen by all teams.   

•  Users  can  receive  notifications  when  passed  the  ball, 
when  they  have  used  the  pedometer  for  more  than  one 
hour,  and  when  comments  and  passes  are  made.  Users 
can configure the types of notification they receive. 

Pass  The  Ball  runs  on  both  iOS  and  Android,  enabling 
teams to have members with different devices. Because we 
wanted the game to be played by existing social groups, it 
was  important  to  support  a  range  of  popular  devices.  We 
also  wanted  players  to  be  able  to  use  their  own  personal 
devices,  as  we  were  interested  in  how  the  game  would  be 
integrated with everyday smartphone use. The final version 
of Pass The Ball was implemented as a hybrid mobile web 

Figure 1. Pass The Ball: Home view (left) and League view 
(right). Names have been changed. Both views are scrollable. 

app, meaning it is run as a native application but content is 
displayed using HTML5. As much as possible of the app is 
implemented as a web app hosted by our servers (meaning 
the  interface  was  standard  across  devices).  For  Pass  The 
Ball,  counting  and  uploading  steps  is  run  natively  as  it 
needs to be run in the background—something that cannot 
be done for a pure web app. Delivery of push notifications 
also  needed  to  be  handled  natively.  Points  are  uploaded  to 
the  server  every  minute.  We  sought  to  create  a  feeling  of 
‘liveness’  in  the  app,  whereby  players  could  observe  their 
teammates’  activities  in  near  real-time.  We  also  included 
icons in the league view to show which teams currently had 
a player ‘on the ball’ whose activity was being tracked.   

The Iterative Design Process and Initial Findings 
The version of Pass The Ball outlined above was arrived at 
through  an  iterative  design  process.  We  developed  and 
trialled  an  earlier  version  where  the  pedometer  was 
constantly  on  for  every  player.  Each  team  had  a  ball,  and 
only  the  player  with  the  ball  could  score  points  for  their 
team.  The  idea  was  that  each  player  could  use  the 
pedometer 
the  ball  passing 
functionality  would  encourage  players  to  examine  and 
discuss  each  others'  activity,  discussing  good  passes,  as 
well  as  ‘missed  passes’  (i.e.  times  when  a  player  without 
the  ball  had  high  levels  of  activity).  Pass  The  Ball  version 
one was trialled with 20 players, making up five teams, in a 
two-week competition. It was an ‘interesting failure’.  

individually,  and 

that 

The  primary  reason  that  we  considered  the  first  trial  a 
failure was that the ball was passed infrequently. The game 
advantaged players that were already highly active, and we 
found  that  these  players  would  retain  the  ball  to  the 

Experience Design for GamesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2419 
 
exclusion  of  more  sedentary  teammates.  One  team  passed 
the ball a lot in the first four days. They coordinated passes 
by  planning  ahead,  announcing  that  they  were  going  to  go 
for  a  walk  at  a  specific  time,  and  asked  for  the  ball  to  be 
passed  when  they  knew  they  were  being  active.  However, 
they  realised  that  the  best  strategy  for  them  in  game  terms 
was to let the most active person in the team (who worked 
as  a  bicycle  messenger)  keep  the  ball  indefinitely.  This 
problem was serious because there soon became no need to 
communicate  with  others  in  the  game.  Another  team 
reported  frustration  that  one  of  their  players  just  kept  the 
ball;  they  requested  a  way  of  intercepting  it.  A  secondary 
problem concerned battery drain on iOS devices, which was 
unacceptably high for several users (the drain was no higher 
than for commercial apps such as Moves, and we note that 
this issue has been resolved for recent iOS devices with the 
inclusion of a coprocessor with a dedicated pedometer). 

Following the first trial we decided that only the player with 
the ball should be able to turn on tracking and that it should 
switch off after one hour if the ball has not been passed. We 
added  the  interception  feature  at  this  point,  so  that  if 
someone  fails  to  pass  the  ball  the  whole  team  does  not 
become  stuck.  During  the  design  session  in  which  we 
decided these changes, we recognised that a key issue with 
this  new  design  is  that  individual  users  cannot  track  and 
quantify  at  will  or  over  the  course  of  a  full  day.  It  was  at 
this  point  that  we  became  intrigued  by  the  question  “what 
is  prioritised  over 
happens  when  social-relatedness 
individual competence in tracking?” 

USER TRIAL 
We report here on our trial of the final version of Pass The 
Ball (the version as set out with bullet points in the previous 
section). This was the second formal trial we staged during 
development and evaluation. This trial was run over a two-
week period. 

Method 
Our  trial  followed  the  approach  and  rational  set  out  by 
Brown  et  al  [5]  for  trialling  applications  in  the  wild. 
Participants  ran  Pass  The  Ball  on  their  own  devices,  with 
deployment handled through ad-hoc distribution. Usage and 
activity data from players’ apps was logged during the trial. 
This  included  scores,  player  communications  within  the 
app, as well as timestamped screen changes by each player. 
All  participants  were  interviewed  following  the  trial.  We 
analysed  the  interview  transcripts  in  an  iterative  manner 
alongside the log data. Our analysis is primarily qualitative.  

Participants 
Thirty-one  participants  were  recruited  (twenty  female, 
eleven  male,  age  range  ~20  to  ~40).  Participants  were 
recruited  through  advertising  and  a  snowball  approach. 
Because  we  wanted  existing  social  groups  to  participate, 
snowballing  (i.e.  asking  participants  to  invite  friends  and 
relatives  to  play)  was  important.  None  of  the  participants 
had participated in the first trial. The participants were each 
given  an  information  sheet  that  gave  an  overview  of  the 

app,  explained  what  data  we  were  collecting  and  how  this 
data  would  be  stored  and  used  in  our  research  study.  The 
sheet  stated  that  participants  could  play  the  game  as  much 
or  as  little  as  they  wanted  and  that  they  were  free  to 
withdraw at any time. Participants were paid 10 UK pounds 
(or a Euro equivalent) at an interview at the end of the trial 
period.  Participants  were  neither  coached  nor  encouraged 
during the trial. Participants that did not already know each 
other were kept separate during deployment and interview. 

The  participants  formed  seven  teams.  In  six  teams,  every 
player  knew  his/her  teammates,  as  friends,  relatives  or  co-
workers.  A  seventh  team,  given  the  name  Barbarians,  was 
formed by us from a group of strangers who did not know 
each  other.  Participants  were  resident  in  the  UK  and 
mainland  Europe.  Some  participants  travelled  during  the 
two-week period, but otherwise all but the Barbarians team 
consisted of players that saw their teammates on a daily or 
regular  basis.  The  teams  ranged  in  size  from  two  to  seven 
people. Not everyone started at exactly the same time, and 
not everyone participated over the full period, as we detail 
below.  From  here  on,  abbreviated  team  names  are  given, 
e.g.  Barbarians  will  be  denoted  as  BAR.  Players  within 
teams  will  be  referred  to  as  BAR1,  BAR2  etc.  Table  1 
summarises the team information.  

Four teams remained in the game to the end of the second 
week. One of these, ROY, entered the game two days late. 
Three  teams  stopped  scoring  before  the  trial  period  had 
finished,  (although  our  logs  show  some  players  in  these 
teams  continued  to  view  the  scores).  Reasons  for  non-
participation included KUL: players travelling abroad (data 
would  have  been  charged  at  high  rates)  and  focusing  on  a 
deadline;  STR:  players  travelling  abroad;  TES:  limited 
mobile  data  and  Wi-Fi,  and  disinterest  in  tracking.  The 
design of Pass The Ball meant that players were reliant on 
other team members, and so the withdrawal of one or more 
individuals could cause participation problems for others. It 
should be noted that it was the three smallest teams that did 
not compete over the full two weeks. 

FINDINGS 
Our  findings  are  organised  with  respect  to  the  concepts  of 
social relatedness and individual competence.  

Social Relatedness 
All  of  the  participants  reflected  at  length  in  the  interviews 
on the collaborative and competitive aspects of the game. 

Collaboration: Passing and Intercepting 
To score points, it is essential for teammates to pass to each 
other  or  to  intercept.  Players  indicated  during  interviews 
that  the  early  passing  decisions  were  largely  uninformed, 
and  often  made  as  gestures  of  inclusiveness  (for  example 
with new members being passed the ball upon entering the 
game).  Several  teams  developed  more  organised  strategies 
as  the  trial  developed,  with  later  passes  being  made  either 
according 
to 
knowledge of others’ routines. 

to  requests,  or  prospectively  according 

Experience Design for GamesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2420Team 

Team 
size 
(m,f) 

Passes / 
Interceptions / 
Comments 

Relation 

Score 

Score 

Week 
1 

Week 
2 

BAR 

(2,5) 

68 / 4 / 128 

Strangers 

46298 

93678 

WEL 

(3,4) 

50 / 13 / 97 

Colleagues 

43211 

63457 

ENT 

(0,6) 

66 / 2 / 42 

Colleagues 

53125 

33657 

ROY 

(2,2) 

22 / 1 / 6 

2 couples 

16835 

62512 

KUL 

(3,0) 

23 / 0 / 30 

Colleagues 

42494 

533 

STR 

(1,1) 

45 / 0 / 3 

Siblings 

11682 

TES 

(0,2) 

7 / 0 / 0 

Friends 

12237 

0 

0 

Table 1: Team composition and engagement levels 
(ordered by team size) 

Examples  of  requests  and  planned  passing  appear  in  the 
comments in figure 1. Some requests were seeking the ball 
to be passed immediately, but most would book the ball for 
a specific time. Some bookings involved the negotiation of 
clashes,  and  tight  coordination  of  passes  (a  problem  being 
that many teams found they had a similar routine, e.g. they 
would  walk  to  work  at  similar  times).  Eventually,  passes 
were  made  prospectively  without  the  receiver  needing  to 
make  a  request  (we  refer  to  this  as  ‘prospective  passing’). 
In figure 1, Brian can be seen to pass to Mary prospectively 
(in  time  for  her  daily  cycle  ride  home).  This  reliance  on 
knowing others’ routines worked better on some days:  

“Weekends were very problematic because we never knew 
where  anybody  was  going  to  go  when”  (interview  with 
KUL1). 

The  reliance  on  routine  also  came  to  favour  some  players 
more  than  others.  So,  while  several  members  of  the  BAR 
team  attributed  their  success  in  the  second  week  to  an 
orderly  scheduling  regime,  BAR7  (who  joined  the  BAR 
team  late)  noted  that  it  felt  like  the  initial  team  members 
were already well organised and that she felt it was hard to 
fit in. BAR7 also complained in interview that the others in 
her  team  seemed  to  have  a  good  sense  of  what  they  were 
doing,  but  that  her  own  life  lacked  the  kind  of  structure 
necessary for prospective passing (this player was a student, 
whereas several others in this team had regular jobs). 

The  in-app  communication  was  one  of  several  means  by 
which  teams  coordinated  themselves.  Only  the  TES  team 
did not use the in-app channel at all. With the exception of 
the  BAR  team  (who  were  strangers  and  had  no  contact 
outside  of  the  app)  all  teams  reported  talking  about  the 
game  face–to–face,  and  through  email  and  social  media. 
The  ROY  team  informed  us  that  they  had  created  a 
Facebook  group  chat  through  which  they  arranged  passing 
schedules. The KUL and WEL teams preferred email to the 
in-app  comments,  as  this  was  viewed  as  a  more  reliable 
way of getting through to colleagues: 

“We  started  using  the  comments  …  but  it’s  easier  for  us 
to  look  at  email  on  the  computer.  I  say,  hey  pass  me  the 
ball because I’m going out to the office, I’m going out to 
this place and I’m going to walk” (interview with KUL1) 

Even though the design of the game meant players did not 
have  to  reveal  their  total  daily  activity  levels,  and  enabled 
players to ‘stand back’ from tracking if they wished, players 
reported concerns about how they were being represented to 
others through the application (even to strangers).  

“It does feel a touch narcissistic. Its like, yeah, I’m going 
to the gym, aren’t I amazing” (interview with WEL3). 

“I  didn’t  want  to  just  ignore  [the  game]  because  that 
makes  it  look  like  I  never  do  anything”  (interview  with 
BAR7). 

We  also  found  from  the  interviews  that  practical  privacy 
issues  impinged  on  coordination.  Members  of  the  BAR 
team reported announcing when they expected to be active, 
but  deliberately  keeping  details  vague  to  avoid  revealing 
information  on  location  or  activity  to  strangers.  For 
example,  one  participant  said  she  was  vague  in  reporting 
where she was going because she did not want to reveal she 
had  children.  Interestingly,  perhaps  alarmingly,  another 
BAR speculated in interview that this player was a mother 
because her activities included shopping and museum visits 
during  the  day.  The  WEL  and  KUL  teams  were  more 
concerned  about  work/life  separation,  and  did  not  feel 
comfortable discussing weekend activities with co-workers: 

“It’s  kind  of  like  down  time,  out  of  work.  You  don’t 
necessarily  want  your  colleagues  knowing  what  you’re 
doing,  at  the  weekend,  in  the  evening”  (Interview  with 
WEL2). 

The  activity  patterns  of  others  were  examined  and 
interpreted  not 
in  mind.  Some 
just  with  passing 
unanticipated  usages  included  colleagues  or  those  within  a 
household  looking  at  activity  traces  to  determine  whether 
someone  was  on  their  way  home,  or  what  time  they  had 
gone to work (further underscoring the privacy and identity 
issues raised by the application).  

in 

rare;  only 

the  game  were 

Interceptions 
twenty 
interceptions  were  made  (thirteen  of  which  were  in  the 
WEL  team,  five  by  one  player).  In  the  words  of  BAR2, 
interceptions “really paid off”, yet most participants did not 
like to intercept or for others in their team to do so. BAR2 
spoke  of  needing  “confidence”  to  intercept,  and  said  that 
this  explained  why  it  was  getting  done  more  often  in  the 
team  dynamics  were  more 
second  week  once 
established.  Players  who  had  not  intercepted  confirmed  in 
interviews  that  they  had  understood  the  feature,  but  we 
found  players  were  generally  averse  to  point  deductions, 
even when the team stood to make overall gains by using an 
interception to restart activity after the ball became passive. 
Interceptions were often perceived as socially unacceptable. 
As  an  example,  one  interception  provoked  the  following 

the 

Experience Design for GamesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2421exchange  in  the  in-game  communication,  when  BAR7 
intercepted a ball left passive by BAR4: 

We  were 
informed 
competition could motivate activity: 

that  under  some  circumstances, 

BAR4:  Sorry,  Just  looked  at  my  phone.  I  would  have 
passed! (In-app comment) 

To which BAR7 responded: 

BAR7:  Yeah  sorry  [BAR4].  Was  heading  out  then  but 
don’t  leave  the  Internet  on  when  I’m  not  using  it  so 
thought I’d just take it. (In-app comment) 

This  exchange  (between  two  British  players)  features  two 
insincere  apologies.  BAR4  apologises  yet  castigates  his 
teammate.  BAR7  apologises  but  then  states  how  she 
manages  data  connectivity  on  her  phone.  In  interview, 
BAR4 singled out this incident as a point of annoyance: 

“[She]  nicked  the  ball  off  me,  I  hadn’t  passed  it  for  an 
hour cos nobody had said they wanted the ball. [She] took 
the ball off me to lose 1000 steps of my 1500 I’d put on.” 
(interview with BAR4). 

The language here is interesting, in that BAR4 felt that the 
ball was “nicked” (i.e. stolen) from him. He took the points 
loss  personally,  as  if  the  points  were  taken  off  his  own 
rather than the team’s overall score (other players reported 
similar feelings). BAR7, we mentioned earlier, is a student 
and had reported that she was less able to keep a schedule. 
She saw the app more as something to use opportunistically 
when  the  desire  arose.  Therefore  her  perception  of  this 
interception was different to that of BAR4. 

“So  [BAR4]  was  like  ‘oh  sorry,  I  would  have  passed  it’. 
But this was 10 or so minutes after I’d intercepted it. And 
it’s  like,  well  I’m  going  out  NOW,  do  you  know  what  I 
mean?” (interview with BAR7). 

“When  you  have  the  ball,  and  if  your  team  score  was 
close  to  that  whoever  you  were  close  to  or  overtaking… 
it’s  certainly  very  motivating  to  do  those  extra  steps,  if 
you  could  take  over  a  team,  while  you’ve  got  your  turn 
then that's quite pleasing” (interview with BAR2). 

“I was on a work day out, and I turned to my group and I 
was  like  ‘we’re  walking  fast  today!    We  have  an  hour  to 
get as many steps in as we can!” (interview with BAR3). 

Although  some  players  barely  looked  at  the  league,  they 
were  kept  informed.  Other  players  would  comment  in  the 
game  on  their  team’s  position,  and  some  reported  in 
interview  about  being  driven  by  competitive  teammates. 
For example ROY1 recounted of his wife ROY2: 

“She  used  to  go  inside  those  teams  and  see  who  is  the 
active person, and she identified a girl… She said there is 
a  girl  and  she  scores  most…  She  said  OK,  this  girl 
probably  took  it  seriously  so  we  have  to  score  more” 
(interview with ROY1). 

The “girl” in question was BAR6 (also referred to as Mary 
in figure 1), who cycled to and from work. Figure 1 shows 
BAR6  scoring  several  thousand  points  over  a  relatively 
prolonged  and  intensive  period.  She  was  noticed  by  many 
players, but oriented to in different ways. In her own team, 
one  of  her  own  teammates  saw  her  as  “hardcore”,  serving 
less as a motivator and more as a figure with authority and 
someone  important  to  get  the  ball  to.  In  other  teams  (who 
could  see  her  activity  but  not  her  comments)  she  inspired 
competitiveness (e.g. ROY1’s comment above). As we will 
discuss, in the STR team she was suspected to be “a cheat”. 

This  incident  is  one  of  many  revealing  that  passing  and 
intercepting  were  seen  as  moral  decisions.  Failures  to  pass 
were  also  oriented  to  morally,  for  example,  the  following 
apology is for not accepting a pass at a ‘booked’ time:  

Individual Competence 
The  participants  all 
their 
spoke  at 
understandings  (and  sometimes  misgivings)  about  the 
tracker and points system.  

length  about 

BAR6:  Sorry  was  rushing  for  a  meeting  and  forgot!  (In-
app comment) 

That  there  was  a  moral  order  to  play  does  not  mean  that 
team members saw eye-to-eye on what was the right thing 
to  do,  but  does  mean  that  with  collaborative  play  came 
responsibilities and expectations among team members.  

Competition: Viewing the League and Other Teams 
It  was  evident  that  all  players  were  working  cooperatively 
with a view to working their respective teams up the league. 
However,  differences  in  the  competitiveness  of  individual 
players were apparent. Some checked the league and drilled 
down into the activity of other teams frequently. Participant 
ENT4  said  that  she  “got  a  bit  obsessive”  about  checking 
league positions, yet others did not take such an interest in 
the  updating  league  table;  even  within  the  ENT  team,  the 
usage  logs  reveal  one  participant  checking  once  every  two 
days, and another checking up to thirty times a day.  

Concepts of Activity 
Participants  used  the  tracker  for  many  kinds  of  activity. 
Activities  referred  to  in  in-app  comments  include  walking, 
running  and  cycling,  but  also  less  specifically  exercise-
oriented  day-to-day  actions  such  as  “pottering”,  shopping, 
and housework. For some participants, everything counted: 

“Every time there is motion we tried to utilise that motion 
to score” (interview with ROY1). 

The  ball  would  rarely  be  booked  for  such  (low  scoring) 
day-to-day  activities,  particularly  after  a  few  days  of  use, 
but  rather  it  was  done  opportunistically.  The  tracking  of 
more  intensive  activity  was  often  preferred  over  less 
intensive  activity.  Therefore,  in  some  respects  the  app 
favoured people who were relatively active.  

In  the  interviews,  and  from  a  close  examination  of  the  in-
app  comments,  it  became  evident  that  the  tracker  was 

Experience Design for GamesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2422inspiring  certain  activities  and  changing  how  some  were 
done. In some cases the game inspired activity: 

“We don’t move that much. Its very good exercise for us.” 
(interview with ROY1 and ROY2 – a couple). 

The  activities  of  ROY2  and  others  were  not  just  more  of 
what they ordinarily did, but were activities invented for the 
app.  ROY2  recounted  spending  a  night  jumping  up  and 
down  with  ROY1  (in  a  mix  of  excitement  and  points 
scoring)  to  the  point  that  their  downstairs  neighbour 
complained.  The  STR  team  initially  experimented  with 
point-scoring  activities  and  found  a  form  of  upper  body 
stretching  exercises  they  were  happy  with.  However,  on 
looking  at  other  teams’  activities,  and  in  particular  that  of 
the  high  scoring  player  BAR6,  they  were  less  sure  of  the 
relevancy  of  this.  They  began  to  focus  more  on  walking. 
They described in interview their experiments with how to 
score when walking, explaining how they found holding the 
phone in one hand and swinging it proved a good strategy. 

Whereas  ROY1  had  seen  BAR6  as  an 
inspiration, 
motivating  them  to  do  further  exercise,  the  STR  team  was 
motivated  by  BAR6  to,  in  their  own  words,  “cheat”.  The 
STR  team  were  suspicious  that  BAR6’s  scores  were  not 
being  scored  through  legitimate  means,  and  gave  up  their 
stretching  to  seek  methods  that  would  score  thousands 
rather  than  hundreds  of  points.  They  explored  forms  of 
shaking  the  phone.  However,  STR  reported  that  their 
shaking  efforts  were  themselves  “hard  work”  and  they 
failed to replicate the levels of activity BAR6 had produced. 

Shaking  appears  to  have  often  occurred  in  the  game  when 
players examined others’ activity traces. KUL also reported 
shaking the phone; in this case the team member had tried 
shaking the phone as he cycled. Again, this was hard work 
and  the  participant  reported  nearly  dropping  his  phone. 
Shaking became something of an art for some players: 

“You need to have a special pressure that gives the phone 
a  feeling  that  a  step  has  been  taken.  I  mean  if  you  just 
shake like this, probably it doesn’t work, but if you shake 
like  this  …  you  need  to  have  your  finger  this  way” 
(interview with ROY1). 

ROY2  responded  to  ROY1  by  saying:  “No.  Not  like  this, 
you  should  do  it  like  this…”  and  demonstrating  an 
alternative  shake.  In  general, 
those  participants  who 
reported  shaking  were  only  doing  so  on  an  experimental 
basis, to test the tracker, or as a means of verifying whether 
others  might  be  cheating.  Most  reported  that  they  would 
prefer to compete on a ‘fair’ basis, e.g.: 

“It seems more fun like, if you’re actually genuinely doing 
some  activity  to  see  what  I  was  scoring  rather  than  just 
trying  to  do  something  to  cheat  it…  if  we’d  won  it  and 
we’d  all  done  that,  it  would  have  seemed  a  bit  rubbish” 
(interview with ENT1). 

Only  the  TES  team  appeared  to  have  little  compunction 
about shaking the phone. They admitted in interview (once 

we had assured them they would be paid no matter what) to 
have  used  the  app  while  walking  once,  and  after  that  to 
have simply shaken their phones a few times. They said this 
was not fun, and we note they used the tracker only a small 
number of times.  

Understanding the Scores  
The  representation  and  quantification  of  activity  in  Pass 
The  Ball  was  deliberately  ambiguous.  The  game  gave  a 
visualisation  and  a  points  score,  but  did  not  specify  what 
these  points  meant.  In  our  interviews  we  found  many 
participants  were  concerned  with  whether  the  activity 
points  they  and  others  gained  were  reasonable.  Many 
participants did not have a firm idea of what activity should 
score  what  points.  As  we  mentioned  earlier,  participants 
used the tracker for various activities, yet many oriented to 
points  as  if  they  were  steps.  Activities  all  scored  ‘steps’. 
Attempts  to  verify  the  tracker  were  with  regard  to  steps. 
Several spoke of trying (and failing) to count steps as they 
walked. Several spoke of trying (and failing) to watch their 
score  increase  when  walking  with  phone  in  hand.  One 
participant got further by looking up information online: 

“I  did  look  up  one  time  to  see,  there  was  like  a 
government statistic to say that in 10 minutes you should 
do x amount of steps … ‘cause I was wondering, is it far 
too much?” (interview with ENT4). 

The main complaints we received about the meaning of the 
tracker  concerned  not  any  discrepancy  between  effort  and 
points scored, or the forms of activity that could be tracked, 
but  consistency.  Consistency  appears  to  have  become  the 
main resource for participants in assessing the quality of the 
tracker.  Participants  were  disconcerted  when  there  were 
differences in what they considered to be equal activity: 

“[ENT2]  and  I  go  out  for  a  walk  at  lunchtime,  and  we 
saw two days where once she had the ball, and once I had 
the ball, and it was totally different results and we knew it 
was the same walk” (interview with ENT1). 

Most  participants,  however,  noticed  through  playing  the 
game  that  how  a  phone  is  carried  can  affect  the  score. 
ENT5 had noticed that carrying her phone in her bag scored 
twice  as  many  points  as  in  her  pocket,  surmising  that  the 
bag provides more motion: 

“My bag kind of sits here (points at hip) so it bounces off 
my leg” (interview with ENT5). 

Some  participants  also  noted  that  some  phones  seemed 
more  generous  than  others,  putting  this  down  to  variations 
in hardware. One player with a new iPhone believed he had 
an  advantage  over  the  others  in  his  team  who  had  older  
devices. We report this view not because we support it, but 
because it reveals ways in which users tried to make sense 
of  the  scores.  Other  forms  of  practice  and  sensemaking 
concerned  consideration  of  data  plans  and  network  access. 
For example BAR7’s participation in the game was shaped 
by  her  wanting  to  minimise  data  use  and  a  desire  to 

Experience Design for GamesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2423conserve battery. Different practices of phone use were also 
made  topical  by  the  game,  for  example  whether  phones 
were  carried  during  mundane  activities  such  as  housework 
or vigorous activities such as running, simply when people 
had  their  phones  on  or  off,  and  how  and  why  it  was  that 
people attended to notifications or checked the game.  

To summarise, we have seen how an activity tracker can be 
flexibly interpreted, with interpretation interwoven with the 
activities  being  tracked,  i.e.  each  being  a  resource  for 
understanding the other. The phone itself was not simply an 
abstract  vessel  for  tracking,  but  was  a  practical  part  of  the 
sensemaking of tracking. 

LESSONS  LEARNED  FROM  PRIORITING  SOCIAL-
RELATEDNESS OVER INDIVIDUAL-COMPETENCE 
Our  work  was  not  a  controlled  study,  but  an  explorative 
design  study  in  which  we  trialled  an  app  in  the  wild. 
Therefore, our lessons learned are discursive and reflective. 

1)  Players  were  accepting  of  the  turn-taking  constraint  to 
activity tracking and communicated with each other.  
Firstly, we have found it is possible to enforce cooperation 
within  an  activity  tracker  and  for  the  tracker  to  remain 
playable,  enjoyable  and  acceptable  to  a  majority  of  users 
over  a  two-week  period.  It  is  interesting  and  somewhat 
surprising  how  accepting  the  players  were  of  a  design  that 
inhibits  self-initiated  and  comprehensive  gathering  of 
personal  activity  data.  This  does  not  mean,  from  a 
behaviour  change  perspective,  that  the  design  of  Pass  The 
Ball is in the players’ interests, but does suggest that users 
are  open  to  novel  designs  in  this  area.  Indeed,  by 
minimising  battery  consumption,  the  design  of  Pass  The 
Ball  made  the  game  more  acceptable  than  an  always-on 
tracker.  The  key  problem  concerning  acceptability  and  use 
was  not  to  do  with  tracking,  but  that  individual  non-
participation  could  curtail  the  functioning  of  the  whole 
team. Players relied on other players remaining active in the 
game. Smaller teams did not last the full trial period. 

2)  The  app  better  highlighted  and  supported  routine 
behaviour than it did non-routine behaviour. 
The  coordination  mechanism  we  have  presented  enabled 
players  to  discuss  and  otherwise  gain  a  sense  of  others’ 
routines,  such  as  their  commutes  to  and  from  work,  and  if 
and when they would go running and cycling. Routine was 
the  primary  coordinative  resource  (although  some  players 
did  report  taking  longer  routes  or  jumping  up  and  down 
purely for game purposes). Players relied heavily on routine 
to  the  point  that  some  people  that  did  not  follow  a  routine 
felt excluded. Routine served as a resource for both planned 
passing,  and  booking  the  ball.  As  such,  the  game  did  see 
participants getting to know what sorts of activity people do 
on  a  day-to-day  basis.  Some  players  reported  this  was 
individually  motivating,  however  we  did  not  see  much 
explicit  encouragement  among  groups  for  players  to 
increase their activity levels. 

3)  Players  sought  practical  ways  to  manage  identity  and 
privacy when using the app. 
Identity  management  was  an  important  consideration  for 
players  (confirming  [17,  23]).  Several  players  reported 
wanting to be seen to be active and feeling good when they 
scored  highly.  But  we  also  found  that  players  wanted  to 
maintain  privacy,  and  that  this  manifested  in  contextually 
specific  ways.  For  example,  among  strangers,  players 
wanted  to  hide  location  and  family  status,  and  among 
colleagues,  players  were  sometimes  reluctant  to  reveal 
weekend  activities.  By  not  having  tracking  always-on, 
players can stand back from tracking if they do not want to 
reveal  activity  or 
the  passing 
mechanism meant players often had to supply written detail 
about  what  they  would  be  doing  when.  This  reliance  on 
language exacerbates and transforms identity issues.  

inactivity.  However, 

in 

the  game.  Some  found 

4)  Players  oriented  to  and  experienced  collaboration  and 
competition in different but colliding ways. 
Coordination  and  competition  was  experienced  and 
interpreted  differently  by  players,  and  these  differences 
melded  and  clashed 
the 
coordination  (i.e.  passing)  mechanism  to  be  enabling  and 
motivating,  but  as  we  have  mentioned,  it  suited  those  able 
to  plan  or  follow  a  routine.  Some  participants  were  more 
concerned with competition elements than others, but those 
who  were  not  interested  seemingly  could  not  escape  the 
competitiveness  of  their  teammates.  To  call  the  game 
‘social’ is to gloss over that it was played and experienced 
within  a  moral  order.  In  terms  of  coordination,  this 
manifested as expectations that players would keep to their 
word  when  booking  a  session,  and  a  preference  for 
organised 
opportunistic 
intercepting). In some respects then, the game was socially 
awkward  (see  [15]).  In 
this 
manifested  as  hopes  and  sometimes  requests  that  others 
would  push  towards  overtaking  other  teams,  and  as 
suspicions  as  to  whether  competitors  were  somehow 
cheating (findings that reflect [12, 21, 24]).  

terms  of  competition, 

opposed 

passing 

(as 

to 

5)  The  practices  by  which  players  made  sense  of  activity 
tracking evolved during play. 
Players’  concepts  of  activity,  and  the  relationship  between 
activity  and  points,  were  not  pre-given  or  static  but 
unfolded  over  time.  We  are  reminded  of  Barkhuus  et  al’s  
[2]  simple  but  important  point  that  tactics  develop  and 
evolve during gameplay. Players discussed with each other 
and  experimented  with  what  activities  the  game  could 
quantify  and  by  how  much.  Some  teams  were  forced  to 
rethink what they were doing when they saw others’ scores. 
This  was  not  necessarily  to  engage  in  more  vigorous 
activity, but could be changing how the phone was held or 
carried when doing an activity. The game also evinced what 
some  considered  cheating  (we  are  ambivalent  to  cheating, 
as  [6,  32]  note,  shaking  a  tracker  can  be  hard  work!)  We 
found that players were not moved by the game to shake the 
phone on more than one or two occasions. All participants 
were interested in the accuracy of the tracker. Some decided 

Experience Design for GamesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2424that  it  was  accurate,  others  that  it  was  not.  Accuracy  was 
primarily  considered  with  respect  to  ‘steps’  (even  though 
this term was not used in the game). 

tracking 

in  activity 

6)  Competency  and  sensemaking 
concerns the whole device, not just in-app data. 
Finally, in the light of the discussion above of sensemaking, 
we  suggest  that  ‘competence’  is  not  limited  to  the 
interpretation and use of data but extends to its production 
(somewhat  reflecting  points  in  [23,  32]).  For  example, 
players  considered  and  discussed  how  scores  could  be 
affected by the physical handling of a device, and came to 
consider  other  relevancies 
to  play  such  as  network 
connectivity.  Several  participants  were  also  aware  that  an 
accelerometer-based  game  played  across  varied  Android 
and iOS devices is inherently problematic. 

GENERAL IMPLICATIONS  
Above and beyond our immediate lessons learned, through 
this  work  we  have  come  to  two  general  implications  for 
designing activity trackers in the context of HCI research. 

1) Attend to people’s “practices” of tracking. 
By  studying  how  people  use  a  tracker  collaboratively,  we 
have come to study practices of tracking. By getting people 
to  communicate  about  tracking  and  to  consider  both  their 
own  and  others’  data,  we  have  found  that  people  orient  to 
and develop ways of making sense of data. The data is not a 
mirror of activity but a medium for understanding it. We do 
not  think  this  phenomenon  is  unique  to  Pass  The  Ball,  but 
rather something made visible by our app and our research 
methods.  The  overriding  design  issue  here  is  that  high-
level,  user  experience  issues  are  at  stake  in  activity 
the 
tracking.  These 
‘relatedness’  and  UI  aspects  of  design  but  pervade  the 
‘competence’  and  measurement  aspects  also.  In  sum,  to 
successfully  design  social  features  in  activity  trackers,  we 
must  carefully  consider  the  lived  aspect  of  tracking.  The 
“practice  turn”  in  HCI  [19]  and  Behaviour  Change  [28]  is 
relevant for understanding activity tracking.  

issues  cannot  be  partitioned 

to 

2) Look within and beyond “collaboration” and “competition” 
in the design of activity trackers. 
There are many design alternatives when considering social 
features  in  activity  tracking.  This  is  often  treated  in  broad 
terms,  for  example  prior  work  such  as  [9,  7]  talks  broadly 
of  “competitive”  and  “collaborative”  trackers.  We  see  a 
need  for  a  more  nuanced  view  of  social-relatedness  in  this 
domain. By changing the way users cooperate in Pass The 
Ball  we  found  that  different  practices  emerged.  We  also 
found  through  examining  use  that  people  had  different  yet 
colliding experiences of cooperation and competition. Some 
were interested in  competition  and  others  not,  but  all  were 
still informed about competition issues by their teammates. 
Social  interaction  was  not  without  somewhat  negative 
qualities such as obligation, conflict, and privacy concerns, 
which  may  or  may  not  influence  motivation.  It  seems 
important  to  move  to  more  nuanced  understandings  of 
cooperative  interaction  in  this  area.  This  point  should  be 

seen in the light of the previous one, and our prior study of 
the  use  of  consumer  activity  trackers  [32]  in  which  we 
found that the social use of trackers goes beyond the the use 
of ostensibly ‘social’ functions. 

led 

CONCLUSION 
We  have  taken  a  research-through  design  approach  to 
explore  issues  in  activity  tracking.  We  have  followed  a 
what-if  question.  As  such,  this  work  is  discursive  and  has 
not set criteria for Pass The Ball to be a success or failure. 
In several senses the app was both success and failure. Pass 
The  Ball  was  enjoyable  for  many  players, 
to 
communication and team interaction, and generally worked 
well  over  the  two-week  trial  period.  This  shows  there  is 
room for creativity and the kind of rule-breaking discussed 
by  [27]  and  subversion  by  [13]  in  the  area  of  activity 
tracker  based  games.  However,  we  must  acknowledge  that 
the  game  relied  on  us  recruiting  teams  and  coordinating  a 
common  start  time.  From  a  behaviour  change  perspective, 
Pass  The  Ball  is  also  somewhat  problematic.  Speaking 
positively,  the  game  mechanic  encouraged  people  to  think 
about and discuss not only their own activity, but also that 
of others. However, it did not often lead to players overtly 
encouraging  others,  it  seemingly  excluded  those  who  did 
not  have  regular  routines,  and  favoured  those  who  were 
more  active  over  those  who  perhaps  needed  to  improve 
their activity levels. This situation might be improved (e.g. 
by  including  the  tracker  within  a  coach-led  programme), 
but we can make no clear claim at this point in time that the 
design we describe has clear advantages over others. 

In  closing,  we  believe  the  activity  tracker  design  space 
deserves  wide  exploration.  There  are  many  ways  in 
tracking  and  relatedness  can  come 
personal  activity 
together. Design oriented HCI has an important role to play 
in this investigation. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  thank  Marek  Bell,  Scott  Sherwood  and  our  colleagues 
in  the  Populations  Programme  (softwarepopulations.com). 
We also thank the anonymous reviewers. This research was 
funded by EPSRC (EP/J007617/1). 

REFERENCES 
1.  Anderson, I., Barkhuus, L, Brown, B. Shakra: tracking 
and sharing daily activity levels with unaugmented 
mobile phones. Mob Netw Appl, 12(2-3) 2007, 185–199. 

2.  Barkhuus, L., Chalmers, M., Hall, M., Tennant, P., Bell, 
M., Sherwood, S., and Brown, B. Picking pockets on the 
lawn: the development of tactics and strategies in a 
mobile game. Proc. Ubicomp 2005, 358-374. 

3.  Bentley, F. et al. Health Mashups: Presenting statistical 
patterns between wellbeing data and context in natural 
language to promote behavior change. TOCHI 20(5), 
2013. 

4.  Bort-Roig, J., Gilson N., Puig-Ribera, A., Contreras, R., 
Trost S. Measuring and influencing physical activity 

Experience Design for GamesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2425with smartphone technology: a systematic review. 
Sports Medicine, February, 2014. 

5.  Brown, B., Reeves, S., Sherwood, S. Into the wild: 

Challenges and opportunities for field trial methods. 
Proc CHI 2011, 1657-1666. 

6.  Cercos, R., Mueller, F. Watch your steps: designing a 

semi-public display to promote physical 
activity. Interactive Entertainment, 2013. 

7.  Chen, Y., Pu, P. HealthyTogether: exploring social 

incentives for mobile fitness applications. Proc Chinese 
CHI 2014, 25-34. 

8.  Consolvo S, et al. Activity sensing in the wild: a ﬁeld 
trial of ubiﬁt garden. Proc CHI 2008, 1797–806. 

9.  Consolvo, S., Everitt, K., Smith, I., and Landay, J. A. 
Design requirements for technologies that encourage 
physical activity. Proc CHI 2006, 457–466. 

10. Consolvo, S., McDonald, D. W, and Landay, J. Theory-
driven design strategies for technologies that support 
behavior change in everyday life. Proc CHI 2009. 

11. Fallman, D. Design oriented Human-Computer 

Interaction. Proc CHI 2003, 225-232.  

12. Fujiki, Y., Kazakos, K., Puri, C., Buddharaju, P., 

Pavlidis, I., and Levine, J. NEAT-o-Games: blending 
physical activity and fun in the daily routine. Comput. 
Entertain., 6(2), 21, 2008. 

13. Gaver, W. What should we expect from research 

through design? Proc CHI 2012, 937-946. 

14. Hermawati, S. and Lawson, G. Managing obesity 

through mobile phone applications: a state-of-the-art 
review from a user-centred design perspective. Personal 
and Ubiquitous Computing, (2014), 1-21. 

15. Huggard, A., De Mel, A., Garner, J., Toprak, C., 

Chatham, A., Mueller, F.. Understanding a socially 
awkward digital play journey. Proc DIGRA 2013. 

16. Kennedy CM., Powell J, Payne TH, Ainsworth J, Boyd 
A,Buchan I. Active assistance technology for health-
related behavior change: an interdisciplinary review. J 
Med Intern Res. 14(3), 2012. 

17. Klasnja P, Consolvo S, Choudhury T, Beckwith R, 

Hightower J. Exploring privacy concerns about personal 
sensing. Proc Pervasive 2009, 176-183.  

18. Klasnja, P., Pratt, W. Healthcare in the Pocket: Mapping 

the space of mobile-phone health interventions. 
Biomedical Bioinformatics 45 (2012), 184-198. 

19. Kuutti, K., Bannon, L. The turn to practice in HCI: 

Towards a research agenda. Proc. CHI 2014, 3543-3552 

20. Libby, R. A simple method for reliable footstep 
detection on embedded sensor platforms, 2008 
http://ubicomp.cs.washington.edu/uwar/libby_peak_dete
ction.pdf (accessed Sept 2014). 

21. Lin, J., Mamykina L, Lindtner S, Delajoux G, and 

Strub, H. Fish'n'Steps: encouraging physical activity 
with an interactive computer game. Proc Ubicomp 
2006, 261–278. 

22. Macvean, A. and Robertson, J. Understanding exergame 
users' physical activity, motivation and behavior over 
time. Proc. CHI 2013, 1251–1260. 

23. Maitland, J. and Chalmers, M. Finding a balance: social 
support v. privacy during weight-management. Proc. 
CHI 2008, 3015-3020. 

24. Maitland, J., Sherwood, S., Barkhuus, L., Anderson, I., 
Hall, M., Brown, B., Chalmers, M., and Muller, H. 
Increasing the awareness of daily activity levels with 
pervasive computing. Proc Per Health 2006. 

25. Miller, A., and Mynatt, E. StepStream: a school based 
pervasive social fitness system for everyday adolescent 
health. Proc CHI 2014, 2823-2832. 

26. Miller, A. et al. The work of play: Supporting a 

pervasive health behaviour change intervention for US 
middle school students. Proc CSCW 2012, 897-900. 

27. Mueller, F., Isbister, K. 2014. Movement-based game 

guidelines. Proc. CHI 2014. 2191-2200. 

28. Nettleton, S., Green, J. Thinking about changing 

mobility practices: how a social practice approach can 
help. Sociology of Health and Illness, 36(2), 2014, 239-
251.  

29. Patrick, H., and Canevello, A. Methodological overview 

of a self determination theory-based computerised 
intervention to promote leisure-time physical activity. 
Psychol Sport Exerc. 2011, 12(1) 13-19. 

30. Reed,  A.  et  al.  SpyFeet:  An  Exercise  RPG.  Proc 

Foundations of Digital Games, 2011.  

31. Richardson, C. R., et al An online community improves 
adherence in an internet-mediated walking program. 
Part 1: results of a randomized controlled trial. Journal 
of medical Internet research, 12(4),  2010. 

32. Rooksby, J., Rost, M., Morrison, A., and Chalmers, M. 
Personal tracking as lived informatics. Proc CHI 2014, 
1163-1172. 

33. Ryan, R.. Patrick, H., Deci E.L., Williams, G. 
Facilitating health behaviour change and its 
maintenance: interventions based on Self Determination 
Theory. European Health Psychologist 10, 2008, 2-5. 

34. Tudor–Locke, C. Bassett, DR. How many steps are 

enough? Sports Medicine, 34(1), 2004, 1–8. 

35. Xu, Y., et al. Designing pervasive health games for 

sustainability, adaptability and sociability. Proc FDG 
2012, 49-56.  

36. Zimmerman, J., Forlizzi, J., and Evenson, S. Research 
through design as a method for interaction design 
research in HCI. Proc CHI 2007, 493-502. 

Experience Design for GamesCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea2426