Patient Perspectives on Self-Management
Technologies for Chronic Fatigue Syndrome

Tabby Davies
University of Bath
Bath, United Kingdom
tjpd20@bath.ac.uk

Simon L. Jones
University of Bath
Bath, United Kingdom
s.l.jones@bath.ac.uk

Ryan M. Kelly
The University of Melbourne
Melbourne, Australia
ryan.kelly@unimelb.edu.au

ABSTRACT
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) is a debilitating medical con-
dition that is characterized by a range of physical, cognitive
and social impairments. This paper investigates CFS patients’
perspectives on the potential for technological support for
self-management of their symptoms. We report findings from
three studies in which people living with CFS 1) prioritized
symptoms that they would like technologies to address, 2) ar-
ticulated their current approaches to self-management along-
side challenges they face, and 3) reflected on their experiences
with three commercial smartphone apps related to symptom
management. We contribute an understanding of the specific
needs of the ME/CFS population and the ways in which they
currently engage in self-management using technology. The
paper ends by describing five high-level design recommen-
dations for ME/CFS self-management technologies.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in HCI .

KEYWORDS
Chronic Fatigue Syndrome; Myalgic Encephalomyelitis; self-
management; self-tracking.

ACM Reference Format:
Tabby Davies, Simon L. Jones, and Ryan M. Kelly. 2019. Patient Per-
spectives on Self-Management Technologies for Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems Proceedings (CHI 2019), May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 13 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.
3300452

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed
to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5970-2/19/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300452

1 INTRODUCTION
Research in HCI has begun to explore the potential for tech-
nologies to assist with the self-management of chronic health
conditions. In this context, self-management refers to an indi-
vidual’s ability to “manage the symptoms, treatment, physical
and psychosocial consequences and lifestyle changes inher-
ent to living with a chronic condition” [7, p. 178]. Previous
work suggests that technology can support self-management
by promoting reflective thinking [46], helping to monitor
symptom triggers [10], and by gathering evidence to facilitate
deeper understanding of a condition [27]. Examples of con-
ditions studied by HCI researchers include chronic pain [3],
HIV+ [11], migraine [65] and irritable bowel syndrome [66].
In this paper we focus on the design of self-management
technologies for people living with Chronic Fatigue Syn-
drome, or Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (ME/CFS)1. ME/CFS is
an example of an enigmatic disease [48] in that it has a range of
symptoms, little clinical consensus on effective treatment [75],
and a lack of symptom specificity. While ME/CFS is thought
to affect 0.2–0.4% of the world’s population [26, 32, 36], re-
search indicates that up to 90% of cases go undiagnosed [32],
suggesting that people with ME/CFS are substantially under-
counted and undertreated [19]. This is problematic because
the condition has an array of debilitating symptoms, includ-
ing extreme tiredness following exertion, cognitive fatigue,
rheumatic pain and disrupted sleep. These symptoms impact
quality of life [39] and can make the condition very difficult to
manage for patients. Furthermore, many people with ME/CFS
report that clinicians do not always provide empathetic sup-
port [41], which may be due to a lack of clinical consensus
around proper treatment of the disease [74, 75].

Our work aims to support people with ME/CFS by explor-
ing the ways in which digital technologies should support
self-management of the condition. While self-management
can be achieved through the use of generic solutions (e.g.
smartphone apps [38]), previous work has demonstrated the
need to design around the symptoms of a given condition and
promote self-care in light of those symptoms [11, 56, 58, 59].

1We use the abbreviation ME/CFS as this follows the convention used in
recent scholarly literature [e.g. 19, 20, 29, 75] and because some patients feel
that the phrase ‘chronic fatigue syndrome’ is a misnomer that trivializes
the medical nature of the condition [21].

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 222Page 1However, designers may struggle to create tailored support
for ME/CFS without a clear understanding of patients’ needs
and goals for self-management. Furthermore, while the preva-
lence of particular symptoms associated with ME/CFS is well
understood [28, 71] there is a lack of knowledge about which
symptoms patients want to manage the most.

Our work addresses these gaps by adopting a patient-centric
approach in which we engage with ME/CFS patients to learn
about their perspectives on the potential for self-management
technologies. We provide three contributions for support-
ing the design of self-management technologies for ME/CFS.
First, we provide a list of symptoms prioritized by people
with ME/CFS, giving immediate direction for the design of
condition-specific support. Second, we find that people with
ME/CFS engage in self-management through off-the-shelf
technologies that do not provide effective support for their
condition. Finally, participants’ responses to a series of com-
mercial apps reveal positive and negative experiences with
specific features. From our studies we derive five recommen-
dations that can guide the design of future self-management
technologies for people living with ME/CFS.

2 BACKGROUND
ME/CFS is a chronic (i.e. long-term) illness with an unknown
aetiology [31]. The primary clinical feature of the condition
is a severe disabling fatigue that has been present for at least
six consecutive months [28]. ME/CFS has a complex array of
symptoms. The foremost of these is post-exertional malaise
(PEM), which refers to symptoms that arise following mental
or physical exertion [19, 35]. These symptoms include a loss
of stamina and intense tiredness that can only be alleviated
through long periods of rest [72]. PEM is highly debilitat-
ing and can occur after even the simplest of tasks, including
“walking, showering, or having a conversation” [35, p. 20].

ME/CFS is also characterized by neurocognitive impair-
ment (known as “brain fog” [57]) that impacts memory, con-
centration and problem-solving ability [67]. Other recognized
symptoms include rheumatic pain affecting the muscles and
joints [1, 4]; poor quality of sleep, which typically leaves in-
dividuals feeling unrefreshed and thus prolongs feelings of
tiredness [4, 67]; and flu-like symptoms including sore throat
and headaches [32]. ME/CFS patients can experience these
symptoms with different degrees of severity. Some are af-
fected so heavily that they are left bedridden and dependent
on others for care [4, 72, 76]. Others may lead a relatively nor-
mal life that is intermittently disrupted by fatigue that lasts
for several days or weeks before subsiding [39]. Symptoms
can also vary on a daily basis, with patients reporting both
“good days and bad days” [39, p. 9].

The highly disabling nature of ME/CFS impacts both physi-
cal and mental health. Patients’ lack of physical activity can re-
sult in muscle deconditioning, making movement even harder

[4]. Around 66% of people with ME/CFS meet clinical criteria
for depression [2] and up to 85% of patients cite depressed
mood as a major symptom [39, 43]. Other research indicates
that people with ME/CFS suffer from perpetuating factors
including mood disturbance, kinesiophobia (a fear of move-
ment [54]), and low self-efficacy [71]. These factors can lead
to a perceived lack of independence and a reduction in social
life [76]. Some patients struggle to accept the realities of the
condition and exhibit a tendency to imagine the worst (known
as ‘catastrophizing’) [71].

Self-Management for ME/CFS
Several formalized programs have been promoted as evidence-
based treatments for ME/CFS [29]. These include graded exer-
cise therapy, a form of physical therapy where physical activ-
ity is gradually increased over time [24], and cognitive behav-
ioral therapy, which aims to improve mental health by address-
ing the prevalence of negative thoughts and behaviors [61].
While early studies indicated that these programs may help
to alleviate the symptoms of ME/CFS [e.g. 60], recent research
has argued that there is limited evidence of their effectiveness
[70, 74, 75]. In addition, participating in these courses can be
very difficult because they require attendance at in-person
treatment sessions. This is problematic because instances of
PEM are associated with changes in routine, prolonged cogni-
tive effort, and travelling [40]. Individuals with ME/CFS have
reported that their symptoms worsen as a result of participat-
ing in such programs [29] and thus many receive no formal
treatment for their condition [32]. ME support organizations
such as Emerge [25] consequently provide guidance for pa-
tients who choose to engage in self-management practices
and manage the condition by themselves [25].

A primary form of self-management for ME/CFS is activity
pacing [30]. The goal of activity pacing is to manage one’s
energy expenditure and avoid PEM by working within one’s
limits [29]. This is done through the planning and routiniza-
tion of day-to-day activities [30], maintaining consistency
in activity levels, accepting current abilities, and gradually
increasing activities over time [6]. Common approaches to
activity pacing include staying within an ‘energy envelope’
[33], which involves balancing energy expenditure so as not
to under- or over-exert oneself, and ‘spoon management’ [50],
which involves imagining one’s energy as a limited currency
that is ‘spent’ on daily tasks. For example, having a shower
would ‘cost’ one spoon of energy. Other self-management
activities for ME/CFS include mindfulness techniques [68],
which help to reduce stress and create inner calm, and the
setting of meaningful and realistic activity goals in order to
avoid over-exertion [6]. However, little is known about how
people with ME/CFS currently use digital technologies to pur-
sue self-management practices, nor how these technologies
should be designed in light of what these practices entail.

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 222Page 23 RESEARCH OVERVIEW
The studies we report in this paper shed light on the cur-
rent technologically-mediated self-management practices of
people living with ME/CFS, providing knowledge of how
technologies should be designed to better support those prac-
tices. We build on the approach of McKillop et al. [48] by
triangulating multiple sources of data to understand patients’
current approaches to managing an enigmatic disease. The
data sources we utilize comprise surveys to identify priorities
for self-management of ME/CFS (Study 1); online discussions
of existing ME/CFS self-management practices and technol-
ogy use (Study 2); and user evaluations of three smartphone
apps that address some of these priorities (Study 3).

Study 1 shows which symptoms people with ME/CFS wish
to prioritize, but does not provide insight into how this might
be done. Study 2 addresses this by investigating how people
currently self-manage using technologies, and reveals difficul-
ties they encounter, giving direction for design. Study 3 then
probes existing apps that enable management of symptoms
identified in Study 1 and practices highlighted in Study 2,
revealing additional design-relevant issues. The three studies
provide complementary perspectives on the research problem
and contribute to a set of design implications and recommen-
dations, listed at the end of the paper.

Recruitment and Ethical Considerations
One of the immediate challenges of conducting research with
ME/CFS patients is that it is unclear how their involvement
might exacerbate the symptoms of their condition. As noted
above, some patients can suffer serious consequences when
deviating from set routines [40] and thus participation in a
research study could cause undue harm by inducing PEM, for
example. This presents major challenges in terms of config-
uring their involvement, not just from a practical perspective
(what techniques should be employed to involve patients?)
but also from an ethical standpoint (how do we involve peo-
ple with ME/CFS without exacerbating their symptoms?).
As an example, the use of face-to-face design workshops (a
well-established method in HCI [22, 51, 52, 64]) would require
participants to attend sessions in-person, risking exacerbation
of symptoms. Furthermore, this could rule out participation
from those experiencing the most severe symptoms.

For this research, we elected to employ remote methods
for all three of our studies as a way of accommodating the
needs and challenges faced by people living with ME/CFS.
Our primary means of recruitment was to approach people
through support groups on Facebook and an online forum
dedicated to ME/CFS. One of the researchers has personal
experience of the condition and was an active contributor
to these groups for several months before the research be-
gan. This experience supported the identification of suitable

online communities to approach, allowed the researcher to
empathize with the concerns of participants, and supported
interpretation of responses during qualitative analysis.

Data collection and communication for all three studies
took place via email, Facebook and discussion forums. This en-
abled participants to read and reply at their own convenience,
and hence accommodated potential fluctuations in their ill-
ness while lowering the risk of harm. In addition, we con-
ducted a full review of the ethical implications of our research
prior to each study, following the institutional concordat for
research integrity at the University of Bath. Our ethical re-
view was approved by the local Departmental Research Ethics
Officer. No financial incentives were offered to participants.
Our initial interactions with ME/CFS patients confirmed
that many anticipated difficulty with participating in any re-
search activities that might disrupt their typical routines or
demand significant physical or mental exertion. Many ex-
pressed these limitations upfront. However, even participants
with severe symptoms (e.g. being frequently housebound or
experiencing extreme ‘crashes’) volunteered to take part. We
made it clear to all participants that their involvement was
voluntary and that they were free to withdraw or suspend at
any time without consequence. We also provided flexibility
of deadlines for completing the activities.

Early data collection suggested that participants would
benefit from regular reminders to complete the requested
tasks, with some stating that they often felt so overcome by
their illness that they have difficulty remembering tasks and
appointments. For this reason we issued frequent reminders
to participants throughout each study, e.g. by revisiting mes-
sage threads to invite further participation, or by sending
gentle email reminders to people who had already consented
to participate. We also took extra care in the design of our
procedures by providing written (rather than verbal) instruc-
tions together with clear, actionable guidelines. We did this
because it seemed likely that participants would need to revisit
these when resuming their involvement, given their reported
tendency to forget about the research.

While some of these steps may seem trivial and can be taken
for granted in many research studies, we see them as critical
for enabling the participation of ME/CFS patients. We found
that participants appreciated the regular reminders and took
advantage of the ability to respond flexibly in accordance with
changes in their symptoms. Many were enthusiastic about
being able to take part in the research.

4 STUDY 1 - SURVEY: PRIORITIZING

SYMPTOMS FOR ME/CFS SELF-MANAGEMENT
Our first study seeks to identify the dimensions of ME/CFS
that are most important for self-management. Previous work
has established the prevalence of ME/CFS symptoms [39, 71]

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 222Page 3but has not focused on prioritizing these symptoms for self-
management technologies. We utilize a ranking task to in-
vestigate the self-management priorities that people with
ME/CFS assign to symptoms associated with the disease.

We compiled a list of 16 primary symptoms associated with
the disease by combining the items from existing ME/CFS
symptom surveys with our own literature review [4, 39, 67, 71,
72]. We then created an online survey that asked participants
to rank the 16 symptom items provided in the list. Specifically,
respondents were asked: “Which symptoms of your disease
would you most like ME/CFS self-management apps to support?”.
The survey was advertised to members of an international
ME/CFS online discussion forum and a closed ME/CFS sup-
port group on Facebook.

We received responses from 39 people, 38 of whom had
received a formal diagnosis of ME/CFS from a clinician. One
person was self-diagnosed. Participants’ average age was
40.3yrs (Range=18–64, SD=9.8yrs). 34 participants identified
as female and 5 identified as male2. 25 participants were res-
idents of the United Kingdom; 9 USA; 2 Australia; 2 Canada,
and 1 Norway. All participants were fluent English speakers.

5 STUDY 1 FINDINGS
Survey responses were analyzed by calculating the median
ranking for each symptom using ratings from all 39 partici-
pants. Figure 1 shows the combined ratings for each of the
symptoms. The boxplot indicates the median, upper quartile,
lower quartile, and range of priority scores for the ratings
received (on a normalized scale from 0–1, where 0 = lowest
and 1 = highest ranking).

The results of the ranking exercise reveal several groups of
symptoms that participants believed self-management tech-
nologies for ME/CFS should support. The highest priority
scores were assigned to symptoms associated with physical
fatigue (severe disabling fatigue, post-exertional malaise),
cognitive fatigue and impairment (impaired memory and con-
centration), sleep-related symptoms (unrefreshing and dis-
turbed sleep), and other physical side-effects (such as physical
deconditioning and aching, weak or stiff muscles). Slightly
lower priorities are given to managing aspects related to so-
cial wellbeing (lack of independence, reduction in social life),
and emotional/affective responses to the disease (mood dis-
turbance, lack of acceptance, low self-efficacy, introversion,
catastrophizing).

While previous studies have reported the prevalence of
these symptoms, our results shed light on the aspects of the dis-
ease for which ME/CFS patients believe they require support.
The distribution of scores for each item reveals that there is
not universal agreement among our respondents about which

2The high number of female participants reflects the fact that women and
men are affected by ME/CFS at a ratio of approximately 5:1 [32].

Figure 1: Self-management priority scores assigned to
ME/CFS disease symptoms by survey respondents.

aspects of the disease self-management apps should prioritize.
However, we observe less variance among the highest and
lowest rated items, i.e. there is stronger agreement that self-
management technologies should aim to support physical
fatigue, and that perpetuating factors such as introversion
and catastrophizing are lower priority.

6 STUDY 2 - DISCUSSION GROUPS:

EXISTING SELF-MANAGEMENT PRACTICES
Our second study builds on Study 1 by investigating ME/CFS
patients’ existing use of technology for self-managing their
condition. Specifically, we explore the technologies they use
to support self-management, the benefits and challenges that
they have encountered, and their emergent needs for enact-
ing particular practices. To explore these issues we collected
qualitative data using three online discussion groups. Two of
these were closed ME/CFS support groups on Facebook and
one was an online public ME/CFS discussion forum. Previous
research indicates that initiating discussions using Facebook
is a valid approach to collecting data from hard-to-reach popu-
lations [8, 44]. One researcher, who had actively participated
in all three forums for several months in order to become
familiar with the community norms and establish rapport
with members, acted as facilitator for the discussions.

The researcher initiated a new discussion thread in each
group, providing an overview of the research and the top-
ics to be discussed, including details regarding anonymity of
comments for research publication. Each post was vetted by
community moderators in accordance with their established
codes of conduct. Participants were invited to introduce them-
selves to one another and provide some background about
their condition. The researcher posed the following opening
questions: “Are there any technologies or applications you have
used to help you manage your ME/CFS? Do you think that they

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 222Page 4help? Do you have any particular issues with these devices or ap-
plications?”. The researcher reassured participants that they
were not required to respond quickly and that they could do
so in their own time, when they felt able to. The researcher fa-
cilitated ongoing discussions by providing prompts for deeper
exploration of topics and guiding conversation towards the
management of symptoms (from Study 1) that were yet to be
discussed. Conversations remained open for 6 weeks.

52 individuals contributed to the discussions across the
three groups (Facebook Group 1: N=17, Facebook Group 2:
N=22, Discussion Forum Group: N=13). This comprised all
participants from Study 1 and an additional 13 people who did
not take the Study 1 survey. Participants posted the following
number of responses in each group - FB Group 1: Mean = 6.41,
S.D. = 3.55; FB Group 2: Mean = 2.67, S.D. = 2.17; Discussion
Forum Group: Mean = 3.62, S.D. = 2.05.

All participant comments were analyzed using a general
inductive approach [69]. Respondent names were replaced
with random IDs prior to analysis. Two authors engaged in
close reading of responses and identified data relevant to
understanding: (1) participants’ reported practices for self-
management; (2) the technological interventions used to per-
form self-management; and (3) perceived strengths and weak-
nesses of these technologies. These authors developed initial
themes through inductive coding. We then conducted a coding
consistency check [69] in which the third author applied these
themes to the data as a test of credibility and dependability,
and to support theme refinement.

7 STUDY 2 FINDINGS
Self-Management Practices and Technology Use
Participants described engaging in data collection to sup-
port three kinds of self-management relevant to ME/CFS.
These were activity pacing and understanding healthy limits,
supporting routinization, and coping and supporting mental
health. Participants reported using a variety of commercial
self-tracking devices and smartphone applications to achieve
these goals. However, only one participant reported using
an app designed specifically for management of ME/CFS
(‘ME/CFS Diary’).

The most commonly used technologies were wearable
tracking devices (e.g. Fitbit, Garmin Vivosmart, Polar heart-
rate monitors, Apple Watch) and general-purpose (i.e. non-
ME/CFS specific) health and wellbeing tracking apps such as
MyFitnessPal, Google Fit and Apple Health. These were used
to capture data related to: physical activity/exercise, sleep,
heart rate and HR variability, activity type, duration and inten-
sity, diet/calorie consumption, menstrual cycles, stress levels,
blood pressure and other primary symptoms.

Activity Pacing and Understanding Healthy Limits. Partici-
pants described attempting to use their tracked data to support

activity pacing and energy preservation techniques such as
spoon management [50] and energy envelope maintenance
[34]. “Pacing is such a big deal” (P50), “Pacing is a big deal for me
too” (P15). Some had attempted to assess their energy expendi-
ture and inform their pacing strategies by combining real-time
monitoring of their physiological data (e.g. step counts, heart-
rates) with records of their activities: “I found it [a heart-rate
monitor] useful in helping me to find and stay within my energy
window.” (P27). One person had used such data for “choosing
which self-care acts to use my energy for on any given day. Do
I shower or eat? Do I take my vitamins or clip my nails?” (P1).
Many participants described their attempts to prevent PEM
and severe disabling fatigue through the use of physical activ-
ity trackers. However, these tools were not used for increasing
physical activity or exceeding a particular target (e.g. 10,000
steps per day [45]), but were instead appropriated as a way of
regulating activity and identifying thresholds to be avoided:
“I use my steps counter in reverse - to help me set limits on the
number of steps I take so I am not suffering so much pain and
fatigue the next day... through experience I have found my op-
timal number of steps each day is 2,000 to 4,000” (P11), “My
Apple Watch tracks all of my motion/activity, standing, and
heart rate. I set a goal (a threshold for me to trigger a crash) and
watch it during the day” (P30).

Understanding healthy limits was an important goal for
our participants, and one individual had used the results of
specialized medical testing to support this goal. He made use
of a wearable device and smartphone app to monitor how
close he came to overexertion: “I have cardiopulmonary exer-
cise test results that objectively show when I go from my aerobic
to anaerobic threshold, is the point where I need to stop. My HR
was 100 at that point. So, my goal is to keep my HR from going
above 100 BPM.” (P49). At the same time, there was a need to
engage in a baseline level of activity (an amount that can be
performed without experiencing PEM) so as to avoid the onset
of muscle weakening and deconditioning. However, one par-
ticipant reported that it was difficult to identify her ‘baseline’
activity level, given daily fluctuations in her condition.

Some participants had attempted to monitor their symp-
toms and record information that might lead to the identifi-
cation of triggers. This was seen as a way of understanding
their condition: “I keep a graph of how many hours of activity
I’ve done (which is great for showing how well I have kept to my
baseline) and I attempt to monitor how my diet, self-discipline,
emotional stress, mind and body rests etc affect it” (P21), “I need
to be able to track my symptoms to figure out the contexts in
which I’m getting better or worse” (P25).
Supporting Routinization. Another way of supporting self-
management of ME/CFS was through activity planning and
scheduling in pursuit of routinization [6, 40]. This was typi-
cally done through the use of apps that incorporated calendars,

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 222Page 5to-do lists, reminders and alarms. These features were used
to establish routines according to fluctuations in energy, and
to balance activities that involved either physical or cognitive
demands. These features were also used to support memory
when experiencing impaired cognitive function: “I need re-
minders as I forget everything” (P23).“I just can’t be without my
calendar on my phone” (P50), “My iPad and iPhone are booster
packs for my brain” (P11). One participant (P21) reported us-
ing a tailored ME/CFS diary app to support scheduling of
tasks but gave negative feedback about the app because it
enforced recording of activities in 30-minute timeslots. This
was problematic because her condition rarely allowed her to
do any single activity for an entire 30-minute period.

Some people found that routinization was bolstered by gam-
ification mechanics that helped to form habits. One participant
reported using an application called ‘Habitica’, which incor-
porates gamified self-management features: “it has a habits
list, a daily list and a to-do list. It has an avatar and as you check
off things or tick the habits you’re trying to establish you level up
and gain items. This helps me acknowledge how well I’m taking
care of myself. You also lose health for bad habits and regain it
when you level up. It’s quite a fun way to gauge what I’m actually
doing. Plus, I love my purple tiger [avatar] that’s now big enough
to ride” (P8). P11 thought that gamification could be used ef-
fectively to help them to stay within their energy envelope:
“Would love a points system that rewards all self-care initiatives...
It should also give reward points for setting healthy limits [for]
the number or length of activities to prevent overexertion.”
Coping and Supporting Mental Health. Finally, people spoke
about their practices related to their mental health, including
accepting their disease and preventing catastrophizing. P34
felt that an important aspect of her self-management was
“coming to terms with the illness” and “accepting what has hap-
pened”. Two participants used mobile app-based meditation
exercises to manage their worries and stress: “A challenge is
coping with the sinking feeling that I can’t do any of the things
I want or need to do. Meditation has really helped and I have
learnt to not let worry make things worse” (P12). P11 reported
engaging in audio-guided relaxation exercises, using a Muse
headband (an EEG-based neurofeedback device) to “deepen
my daily meditation practice... I’m very grateful for these de-
vices”. Practices relating to mental wellbeing were sometimes
interwoven with the management of energy expenditure. P11
described using mindfulness techniques as a way to “check in
with my body” and guarantee a moment of mental pause to
reflect on her physical and cognitive fatigue.

Problems with Self-Management Using Technology
Participants described a range of issues that they encountered
when engaging in self-management. We delineated these into
technology-centered issues, which relate to general usability

difficulties or features that do not accommodate the needs of
ME/CFS patients, and condition-centered issues, which relate
to self-management challenges that people with ME/CFS face
as a result of their condition, rather than as a result of design
choices.

Technology-Centered Issues. Many participants stated their
interest in using technologies to support activity pacing and
described appropriating commercial ‘self-tracking’ solutions
in pursuit of this. At the same time, participants were quick
to note the limitations of these technologies for pacing. Spe-
cific issues included an over-emphasis on increasing physical
activity, limited ways of capturing different kinds of exertion,
and a lack of support for alerts about over-activity.

Some participants described how self-management with
commercial devices such as Fitbit was difficult because these
devices are not designed around ME/CFS. They desired tai-
lored solutions and were cautious about using generic health
applications: “We need devices that are suitable for monitoring
the signs of CFS and whose data will be properly interpreted in
terms of what those signs and symptoms mean about our condi-
tions. It will be important to avoid misdirection when something
for one condition is used for a very dissimilar one.” (P24).

Participants wanted features that would help them to avoid
going over their activity threshold: “I’ve wanted a simple way
of triggering an alarm when you go over your limit. The commer-
cially available devices are all aimed at healthy people trying to
improve their fitness and they’re incredibly complicated to pro-
gram just to get that alarm for an upper limit. As a brainfogged
person with ME, I found them impossible.” (P9).

A further limitation was that participants found it difficult
to track ‘fatigue’ as a general concept: “ I’d love [a tracker] more
directly related to fatigue” (P36), “I discovered FibroMapp, but
it doesn’t give me many fatigue-related specifics, and doesn’t
let me enter fatigue more than once a day... Fatigue is kinda
hard to measure” (P26). They also noted the limited availabil-
ity of tools to support tracking of the cognitive aspects of
their disease, such as mental exertion, compared with those
for tracking and monitoring physical activity. “The cognitive
burden should really feature.” (P31). “[I need] something that
lets me keep track of sedentary activities and emotional events
in terms of energy use.” (P2). “I don’t generally use the steps
as a guide for when to rest as I get really fatigued from mental
exertion too - driving, reading etc.” (P15).

Participants were concerned about the accuracy of tech-
nologies like Fitbit: “I don’t believe the readings are accurate.”
(P24). While the accuracy of step counters is a common com-
plaint among users [77], our participants focused more on
the trackers’ inaccuracy in terms of differentiating the inten-
sity of activity: “I find the Fitbit largely inaccurate in figuring
out strenuous versus light activity” (P3). This was seen as a
concern when attempting to ‘pace’ one’s energy expenditure.

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 222Page 6One person described her attempts to stay within her energy
envelope by using a heart rate monitor: “I guess I don’t bother
with exactly how high it is, just work to keep it under a level
where I ‘feel’ it” (P36).

Beyond problems with activity pacing, many participants
highlighted a need for greater simplicity in the tools they used
for tracking data. Some participants had felt overwhelmed
when attempting to capture data related to different facets of
their condition: “I get overwhelmed by having to track a bunch
of symptoms every day” (P36), “I have always struggled with
keeping records/journal for tracking symptoms. I get bogged
down in it, because there are so many variables” (P21). This gen-
eral notion of tracking burden has been previously reported
in the literature on personal informatics [11, 13, 37], but was
particularly acute for our participants given the specifics of
their condition.

Condition-Centered Issues. In addition to issues with self-
management technologies, participants discussed how living
with ME/CFS made it difficult to maintain self-management
practices. For example, many identified activity pacing as one
of the most significant self-management challenges but stated
that their ability to engage in pacing was often hampered by
their symptoms: “Pacing is my number one struggle... hindered
by my mental fatigue and brain fog” (P21), “I agree with ev-
eryone else here that pacing is the number one challenge. I’m
trying to establish a habit of checking in with my body three
or four times a day to see how I’m doing and whether I need to
reassess my goals with the energy I have left... before overdoing
it and suffering the consequences” (P11).

Two participants reported that they relied on others to track
and monitor their symptoms as result of the difficulties they
faced with self-management applications. Previous work has
noted that self-care is often a collaborative endeavor [18, 55]
and this was reflected in some of our participants’ reliance on
family members for self-management. For example, “I keep
in touch with my son during the day as he monitors my daily
ups and downs.” (P41). “I utilize my husband [for monitoring
energy levels] as much as possible when he’s at home.” (P32).

Incidents of ‘crashing’ (suffering PEM) also posed a signif-
icant challenge for those engaging in self-management. One
participant commented “Crashing leaves me feeling particu-
larly ill and I find it difficult to keep my eyes open even” (P3).
The consequence of this was that participants would incur
lapses in recording data that coincided with ‘crash days’. For
example, P50 reported difficulties with recording data dur-
ing bouts of severe brain fog and migraines: “When I record
a migraine my app will lead me to several different pages to
annotate each and every little thing. That would be good, but
during a migraine, I simply want to go lay down.” Participants
discussed wanting to record what was happening in the mo-
ment to avoid problems with recall and retrospective logging

(exacerbated by disease related memory impairments), but
revealed that reminders were often too late or were delivered
when symptoms remained obtrusive.

8 STUDY 3 - USER STUDY:

EXPERIENCES WITH SELF-MANAGEMENT APPS
Study 2 demonstrated that people with ME/CFS patients lever-
age self-tracking devices and smartphone apps to support
self-management of their disease. Our third study provides
further understanding of ME/CFS patients’ perspectives on
the use of smartphone applications to support management
of key disease symptoms (identified in Study 1).

We conducted a user study in which 24 people with ME/CFS
used a series of self-management apps. All of these individuals
had also participated in Studies 1 and 2. We selected three apps
spanning the range of symptoms that participants had previ-
ously prioritized in Study 1, and the range of self-management
approaches identified in Study 2 (e.g. self-tracking, scheduling,
automated and manual data logging, gamification, mindful-
ness, etc.). These apps were not provided in order to assess
the efficacy of app-based interventions, but rather to provide
prompts to elicit further feedback and design requirements
for ME/CFS self-management technologies.

We compiled a list of all apps that participants had reported
using in Study 2, combined with additional Google Play and
Apple App Store self-management apps related to ME/CFS
disease symptoms. We then applied the PRISMA protocol [5]
for shortlisting apps for evaluation. This comprised: filtering
of duplicate apps; eliminating non-English apps; removing
apps requiring purchase and those not updated within the past
year; and separation of apps into their core functionality (e.g.
separating apps designed for diagnosis, and those for ongoing
self-management). We also conducted literature reviews to
identify shortlisted apps whose effectiveness had been demon-
strated for general health and wellbeing management. From
our final shortlist we selected three self-management apps to
deploy in our study.

App 1: Sleep-2-Peak (S2P) objectively measures and tracks
fluctuations in fatigue [9]. S2P incorporates 3-minute Psy-
chomotor Vigilance Tests (reaction time tests), which ac-
curately measure fatigue-related changes in physical and
mental performance [9]. The app then recommends opti-
mal sleep/wake times to the user based on reaction time pat-
terns. S2P also enables users to investigate the association
between fatigue and substances such as caffeine and medica-
tions, through self-logging features. S2P provided participants
with features to track a validated measure of fatigue based on
reaction times [9], to reflect on their physical/mental perfor-
mance and sleep-cycle, and to identify potential factors that
may influence their symptoms. We selected S2P because it sup-
ports the monitoring of fatigue, which was the most important

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 222Page 7disease symptom identified in Study 1. In addition, Study 2 re-
vealed that people with ME/CFS currently try to track fatigue
with devices like Fitbit, but find these solutions unsuitable.

App 2: SuperBetter (SB) gamifies real-life tasks and behav-
iors in order to promote the achievement of personal goals,
referred to as “Power-ups” (e.g. walking a certain distance,
stretching, taking a moment to rest) and the avoidance of
barriers to goals, labelled as “Bad Guys” (e.g. over-exerting
oneself, eating unhealthily) [14]. Users can select predefined
power-ups and bad-guys to target or avoid, and invite other
users with similar experiences (“Allies”) to help them define
their own. SB provided our participants with opportunities
to gamify existing self-management practices, as well as find
new activities that may build physical, mental, emotional and
social resilience. Randomized controlled trials have demon-
strated that SB is an effective self-management tool for treat-
ing depressive symptoms [63], but no studies have explored
its use for managing ME/CFS specifically.

We selected SB because it gives users the opportunity to
support routinization through habit-formation and gamifi-
cation, which Study 2 revealed as beneficial for people with
ME/CFS. The app also enables user customization of goals to
support aspects of physical and mental wellbeing that matter
most to individuals.

App 3: Smiling Mind (SM) provides guided meditations and
exercises based on mindfulness practices [47]. Mindfulness
has been identified as beneficial for ME/CFS patients in terms
of managing impairment, depressed mood, and catastrophic
thinking [62]. Mindfulness was used by some Study 2 partici-
pants as a technique for pausing to ‘check in’ with their body
(e.g. for pacing) and to manage mental wellbeing. SM also
includes a range of additional features, e.g. timers, reminders
and tracking of time spent on mindfulness activities, which
may support routinization and scheduling.

All 24 user study participants had received an ME/CFS
diagnosis from a medical professional. The average age of
participants was 40.1 yrs (Range = 20–64, S.D. = 11.3yrs). 21
identified as female and 3 identified as male. 12 were resi-
dents of the United Kingdom; 7 USA; 3 Australia; 2 Canada.
Participation involved using up to two of the selected apps
(randomized selection) at least once per day for a period of two
weeks, followed by completion of an online feedback form that
captured details of users’ experiences with each app3. Partici-
pants were asked to describe how they used the application, if
there was anything they particularly liked/disliked, and any
benefits/limitations that the app had for management of their
condition. In line with our general approach for involving peo-
ple with ME/CFS in our research, we provided detailed task
instructions and regular reminders throughout the two-week

312 participants opted to use two apps, the other 12 used a single app.
N = 12 for each app.

period. Participants were instructed to suspend their use of
apps if they made their symptoms worse. We also provided
flexible deadlines for returning feedback. This was important
as the nature of the participants’ ME/CFS meant that several
people required additional time, due to adverse health.

As with Study 2, feedback from participants was analyzed
by the first and second authors using a general inductive
approach [69], with coding consistency checks and theme
refinement conducted by the third author.

9 STUDY 3 FINDINGS
We detail participants’ responses according to positive and
negative aspects of the apps for self-management of ME/CFS.

Positive App Experiences
Participants reported that some in-app features for tracking
data about their symptoms, behaviors and self-management
activities provided value for supporting pacing and routiniza-
tion. For example, Participants 8 and 51 reflected on their
fatigue levels using data visualizations and diary views in S2P.
Participant 34 used records of her SB activities (i.e. completed
and outstanding power-ups/bad-guys) “as a tool to see how I
had done during the day” and to schedule further tasks and
inform her activity pacing decisions.

Participant 31 explained that her S2P data accurately re-
flected her fatigue patterns, around which she structured her
routine: “It shows I am more alert in the mornings and then
fade throughout the day. By evening, my mind is not very clear”.
She felt reassurance in seeing these patterns confirmed by her
data, but believed that more beneficial insights might come
from exploring how her fatigue changed in response to certain
events or triggers: “I did not have any sleepless nights during
this period, but I’d like to test that out”. P27 described the value
of having digital records of her activities and fatigue, not for
personal reflection, but for sharing with health professionals:
“It could serve as proof to doubting doctors”.

Two participants reported that the gamification elements
of SB raised their enthusiasm for self-management: “I liked the
game aspect, that approach appeals to me and would encourage
me to engage” (P44), “Managing my CFS is so much work, mak-
ing some of that fun is good” (P34). Three people valued the
ability to define their own behaviors to target or avoid in SB:
“I liked the simplicity and that I could make my own to person-
alize it to me” (P7). Participant 24 enjoyed finding power-ups
contributed by other users, which were appropriate for her
condition: “I liked the reminder to drink water and some of the
power-ups like hugging yourself, dancing or being silly”.

Many participants valued opportunities for low-effort in-
teractions with the apps, for example receiving audio instruc-
tions for guided relaxation and mindfulness exercises in SM,
without the need to hold the phone or view the screen: “It
required less energy expenditure to participate... the voices were

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 222Page 8gentle and soothing” (P44). Participant 19 wanted to see this
approach incorporated into other apps in order to reduce in-
teraction with the screen: “I’d like an option of having the goals
read out loud”.

In terms of addressing symptoms, SM’s mindfulness exer-
cises provided benefits to participants for mental, emotional,
cognitive and sleep-related disease factors: “I have a lot of anxi-
ety surrounding my symptoms and I believe this app helped that.
I do think it is a great tool to have to at least help with anxiety and
possibly with some cognitive issues.” (P14), “It helped me calm
my thoughts before I went to sleep... I was less anxious and rest-
less. I really like the app and am going to continue to use it” (P34).

Negative App Experiences
Participants using SB reported that the activity goals repre-
sented by power-ups, which were described within the app as
being beneficial for physical, mental and social resilience,
were often at odds with their condition. Some were frus-
trated when encountering suggestions for physically and
cognitively demanding activities that were beyond their ca-
pabilities: “Most of the activities were at odds with having CFS”
(P44), “There were suggestions to walk around the block etc.
that are beyond my limitations. There was also a lot to do with
motivation to do a thing, whereas I need more motivation to
slow down and rest” (P19).

Only a few participants made use of the ability to create
their own power-ups and bad guys in SB. This was either due to
difficulties in setting appropriate goals and barriers, because
of limited understanding of their own limits, e.g. “I found the
power-ups and bad guys easy to use, but more difficult to think
up my own” (P7), or as a result of difficulties with regard to the
complexity of the app interface: “I need a simpler interface...
Have everything on one page, make it as easy as possible to add
own goals on the same page instead of in a menu” (P19).

Some participants reported that cognitive fatigue and im-
paired concentration made it difficult to use some of the apps.
Three participants found the app navigation in SB and SM to
be significant barriers and reduced their use of the apps as a
result: SB: “It’s too overcomplicated. The layout and function-
ality was too overwhelming to use with ease, especially if ill or
experiencing brain fog. ” (P7). “Writing was quite small in some
areas and I struggled to concentrate on reading it.” (P13), SM:
“interface too busy...caused brain fog” (P39).

Other symptoms such as muscle weakness and physical
fatigue also had an effect on app use. Participant 27 reported
that the recommended posture for holding the phone during
the S2P reaction time tests was uncomfortable, but was unsure
whether altering this position would affect the accuracy of
test results. In contrast, Participant 13 appreciated that each
of the apps were suitable for brief interactions: “short enough
that my muscles didn’t seize from holding the phone”.

Finally, one participant described terminology, such as the
‘Lazy Exercise’ label given to a set of power-ups in SB, as “very
disheartening and shaming for those with more severe CFS...
I felt awful after being confronted with this... lazy is so often
thrown at CFS sufferers as an insult. To not even be capable [of
these tasks] was horrible. It deterred me so much I stopped using
the app.” (P44).

10 DISCUSSION AND DESIGN IMPLICATIONS
This work contributes a deeper understanding of ME/CFS
patients’ needs for self-management technologies. The stud-
ies also affirm the results of prior work [11, 56], which has
highlighted that people with chronic conditions encounter
significant challenges when self-management tools are not
tailored to the specifics of their condition. Our studies have
revealed a set of particular concerns that are relevant to the
self-management of ME/CFS, from which we propose five
high-level design recommendations.

1. Help to determine personal thresholds. Our research
suggests that people with ME/CFS want to self-manage their
physical and cognitive energy expenditure by determining
personalized activity thresholds. Specifically, Study 2 showed
that patients wanted to identify a minimum daily activity
threshold to avoid problems such as muscle deconditioning,
and yet also wanted to identify a maximum daily threshold
to avoid feelings of severe disabling fatigue and instances of
PEM. Understanding these thresholds is also a key precursor
to activity pacing and staying within an ‘energy envelope’.
However, participants reported that their current solutions
(commercial self-tracking technologies such as step counters
and heart rate monitors) do not have explicit support for iden-
tifying and recording these thresholds. This may be because
these devices are designed with the aim of simply increasing
physical activity [e.g. 16], which does not adequately reflect
the self-management goals of people living with ME/CFS.

To address this, future designs should provide features that
allow people with ME/CFS to determine appropriate thresh-
olds for both physical and mental activity. This will support
the recognition of activity levels that cause crashes, help to
avoid instances of PEM, and can also support the budgeting
of energy expenditure.

2. Provide support for activity pacing and routiniza-
tion. Our research suggests that managing symptoms related
to physical fatigue is a priority for people with ME/CFS (Study
1) and that this is typically achieved by appropriating com-
mercial activity trackers in service of activity pacing (Study 2).
We also found that people with ME/CFS wanted to routinize
their daily activities by using timers, calendars, and to-do
lists to manage tasks (Studies 2 and 3). However, participants
noted that activity trackers (which they used to inform pacing
decisions) do not typically include these kinds of functionality.

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 222Page 9To address this, future self-management applications should
provide explicit support for activity pacing and should allow
for routines to be established and maintained. For example,
an application might include energy budgeting tools that help
to plan activities, and could issue reminders to ensure that
these activities are completed on time. The application could
also set appropriate goals given the user’s previous energy
expenditure and their remaining budget for the day, and could
incorporate mechanisms to alert users when they are at risk
of exceeding their limits.

3. Create tools to support fatigue tracking. All three
of our studies revealed that people with ME/CFS wanted to
track and monitor physical and cognitive fatigue as general
concepts. However, participants in Study 2 reported finding
this hard with most existing technologies.

To address this, future self-management applications could
enable tracking of fatigue through self-report mechanisms or
semi-automated approaches like the reaction time tests used
in Sleep-2-Peak (Study 3). However, these methods of data
collection require user effort in order to log data, and Study
3 showed that this effort may be particularly problematic for
people with ME/CFS because it can contribute to feelings of
fatigue. Future work could therefore explore the potential for
fully automated fatigue logging, such as through wearable and
‘cognitive personal informatics’ devices like EEG [23], or by us-
ing patterns of smartphone app use to infer a user’s state [53].
4. Motivate users to engage in self-management. Study
3 showed that people with ME/CFS valued features that mo-
tivated them to continue using a technology, and which en-
couraged them to track data. Gamification was cited as an
effective way of achieving continued use because it intro-
duced an element of fun to self-management. In line with
prior work, which demonstrates the potential of gamification
to facilitate self-management in persons with chronic condi-
tions (e.g. [49]), our findings suggest that self-management
technologies for ME/CFS should employ lightweight gami-
fication mechanisms as a way of fostering engagement and
continued motivation.

However, the nature of ME/CFS means that it may be dif-
ficult to use self-management technologies during symptom
flares. Therefore, we suggest that gamification mechanisms
for ME/CFS should be designed to reward cumulative self-
management activity, and should avoid penalizing people if
they incur periods of inactivity (such as resetting progress or
changing the interface if certain goals are not met [e.g. 17]).
Additionally, designers should be aware of the terminol-
ogy they use when trying to support self-management. In
Study 3, we found that some people with ME/CFS felt that
self-tracking technologies could ‘shame’ them through ac-
cusations of laziness and other prompts that highlight their
inability to perform exercise. Feelings of illness-invalidation
(such as by associating severe fatigue with laziness) have

been shown to be common amongst ME/CFS patients [73].
Experiences of delegitimation and shaming can have further
negative consequences, such as by causing patients to iso-
late from their social circles [15]. This emphasizes the need
for a careful and compassionate approach when designing
self-management technologies for this population.

5. Tailor support according to individual differences
and disease fluctuations. While our studies have drawn
attention to key goals and challenges faced by people with
ME/CFS, it is also important to recognise that the severity of
particular symptoms can vary from person to person. This
was partly evidenced by the findings of Study 1, where symp-
toms such as Cognitive Fatigue, Impaired Concentration, and
Aching Muscles had high variance in their priority scores.
This suggests that each individual may be affected by certain
symptoms more or less severely. Likewise, it is also important
to note that the severity of ME/CFS for a given person can
fluctuate on a daily basis. Many of our Study 2 participants
described a lack of consistency in their symptoms from one
day to the next, a phenomenon that has been observed in
other chronic conditions [12, 56].

To address this, designers should ensure that technolo-
gies can accommodate individual differences between peo-
ple with ME/CFS. For example, features for activity pacing
should be tailorable to the specifics of an individual’s condi-
tion, such as by allowing adjustable energy envelopes [34].
Self-management technologies should also accommodate
the differences that can arise as a result of daily fluctua-
tions in disease activity, perhaps by recognizing ‘good days’
and ‘bad days’ in their functionality [12]. For example, users
could explicitly disable motivational prompts on bad days,
or could receive recommendations for more demanding self-
management tasks on better days. Similar guidelines have
been proposed for apps to help people with Parkinson’s Dis-
ease [56], suggesting that this strategy may benefit a range
of chronic health conditions.

Finally, we suggest that self-management technologies for
ME/CFS should be very simple to use. This is particularly
acute for people with ME/CFS because the app itself could
act as a symptom trigger if it requires significant cognitive
or physical effort to use. People in Study 3 experienced tired-
ness as a result of complicated menus or hard-to-read fonts,
suggesting that designers should pay extra care to user effort
when designing technologies for people with ME/CFS.

11 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper has explored the design of self-management tech-
nologies for people living with ME/CFS. Study 1 identified
a list of symptoms prioritized by people with ME/CFS, giv-
ing immediate direction for the design of condition-specific
support. Study 2 identified a need for solutions that assist
existing self-management practices such as activity pacing

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 222Page 10and fatigue monitoring. Study 3 revealed specific positive and
negative design features through participants’ responses to a
series of commercial apps. Collectively, our studies illustrate
the specific needs of people with ME/CFS and provide further
evidence that chronic conditions bring unique concerns that
must influence technology design [11, 56].

Based on our study, we see several opportunities for future
work. First, our recommendations can support the design of
tailored self-management applications that should be tested
in conjunction with ME/CFS patients, such that they have
an ongoing stake in the design process [42]. Second, our de-
sign recommendations are based on patients’ needs and ex-
isting practices. However, it is important to recognise that
our work does not incorporate the perspectives of clinicians,
and these may be complementary in terms of understanding
opportunities for self-management [48]. Finally, there may
be opportunities to explore how technologies could support
the collaboration that occurs between ME/CFS patients and
their caregivers [55]. A number of participants in Study 2 ac-
knowledged that they relied on family members for additional
support. Future work could explore the design of collabora-
tive applications that provide caregivers with a stake in the
condition management process.

REFERENCES
[1] Leslie A Aaron, Mary M Burke, and Dedra Buchwald. 2000. Over-
lapping conditions among patients with chronic fatigue syndrome,
fibromyalgia, and temporomandibular disorder. Archives of internal
medicine 160, 2 (2000), 221–227.

[2] Susan E Abbey. 1996. Psychiatric diagnostic overlap in chronic fatigue
syndrome. Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: An Integrated Approach to
Evaluation and Treatment (1996), 49–71.

[3] Phil Adams, Elizabeth L. Murnane, Michael Elfenbein, Elaine
Wethington, and Geri Gay. 2017. Supporting the Self-Management of
Chronic Pain Conditions with Tailored Momentary Self-Assessments.
In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1065–1077.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025832

[4] Niloofar Afari and Dedra Buchwald. 2003. Chronic fatigue syndrome:
a review. American Journal of Psychiatry 160, 2 (2003), 221–236.
[5] Kevin Anderson, Oksana Burford, and Lynne Emmerton. 2016. App
Chronic Disease Checklist: Protocol to Evaluate Mobile Apps for
Chronic Disease Self-Management. JMIR Res Protoc 5, 4 (04 Nov 2016),
e204. https://doi.org/10.2196/resprot.6194

[6] Deborah Antcliff, Philip Keeley, Malcolm Campbell, Steve Woby, Anne-
Maree Keenan, and Linda McGowan. 2018. Activity pacing: moving
beyond taking breaks and slowing down. Quality of Life Research 27,
7 (01 Jul 2018), 1933–1935. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11136-018-1794-7
[7] Julie Barlow, Chris Wright, Janice Sheasby, Andy Turner, and Jenny
Hainsworth. 2002. Self-management approaches for people with
chronic conditions: a review. Patient education and counseling 48, 2
(2002), 177–187.

[8] Narelle Biedermann. 2018. The use of Facebook for virtual asynchro-
nous focus groups in qualitative research. Contemporary nurse 54, 1
(2018), 26–34.

[9] Jean-François Brunet, Dominique Dagenais, Marc Therrien, Daniel
Gartenberg, and Geneviève Forest. 2017. Validation of sleep-2-Peak:

A smartphone application that can detect fatigue-related changes in
reaction times during sleep deprivation. Behavior Research Methods 49,
4 (01 Aug 2017), 1460–1469. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428-016-0802-5
[10] Davis Buls and John Rooksby. 2017. Technology for Self-Management
of Rosacea: A Survey and Field Trial. In Proceedings of the 2017
CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Comput-
ing Systems (CHI EA ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1516–1523.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3027063.3053080

[11] Adrian Bussone, Simone Stumpf, and George Buchanan. 2016. It Feels
Like I’m Managing Myself: HIV+ People Tracking Their Personal
Health Information. In Proceedings of the 9th Nordic Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction (NordiCHI ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
Article 55, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/2971485.2971542
[12] Kathy Charmaz. 1993. Good days, bad days: The self in chronic illness

and time. Rutgers University Press.

[13] Eun Kyoung Choe, Nicole B. Lee, Bongshin Lee, Wanda Pratt, and Julie A.
Kientz. 2014. Understanding Quantified-selfers’ Practices in Collecting
and Exploring Personal Data. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 1143–1152. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557372
[14] Tommy Chou, Laura J. Bry, and Jonathan S. Comer. 2017. Multimedia
Field Test: Evaluating the Creative Ambitions of SuperBetter and Its
Quest to Gamify Mental Health. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice 24,
1 (2017), 115 – 120. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cbpra.2016.10.002
[15] Juanne N Clarke and Susan James. 2003. The radicalized self: the
impact on the self of the contested nature of the diagnosis of chronic
fatigue syndrome. Social Science & Medicine 57, 8 (2003), 1387–1395.
[16] Sunny Consolvo, Katherine Everitt, Ian Smith, and James A. Landay.
2006. Design Requirements for Technologies That Encourage Physical
Activity. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI ’06). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 457–466.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124840

[17] Sunny Consolvo, David W. McDonald, Tammy Toscos, Mike Y.
Chen, Jon Froehlich, Beverly Harrison, Predrag Klasnja, Anthony
LaMarca, Louis LeGrand, Ryan Libby, Ian Smith, and James A.
Landay. 2008. Activity Sensing in the Wild: A Field Trial of Ubifit
Garden. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1797–1806.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357335

[18] Juliet Corbin and Anselm Strauss. 1985. Managing chronic illness at
home: three lines of work. Qualitative Sociology 8, 3 (1985), 224–247.

[19] Todd E Davenport, Staci R Stevens, J Mark VanNess, Jared Stevens,
and Christopher R Snell. 2018. Checking our blind spots: current
status of research evidence summaries in ME/CFS. British Journal of
Sports Medicine (2018). https://doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2018-099553
arXiv:https://bjsm.bmj.com/content/early/2018/07/17/bjsports-2018-
099553.full.pdf

[20] Wilfred C. de Vega, Santiago Herrera, Suzanne D. Vernon, and
Patrick O. McGowan. 2017. Epigenetic modifications and gluco-
corticoid sensitivity in Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue
Syndrome (ME/CFS). BMC Medical Genomics 10, 1 (23 Feb 2017), 11.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12920-017-0248-3

[21] Adrienne. Dellwo. 2018.

Chronic Fatigue Syndrome.
//www.verywellhealth.com/myalgic-encephalomyelitis-me-715663

Myalgic Encephalomyelitis or
https:

Available Online.

[22] Carl DiSalvo, Jonathan Lukens, Thomas Lodato, Tom Jenkins, and
Tanyoung Kim. 2014. Making Public Things: How HCI Design Can
Express Matters of Concern. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 2397–2406. https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557359

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 222Page 11[23] Cillian Dudley and Simon L. Jones. 2018. Fitbit for the Mind?: An
Exploratory Study of ‘Cognitive Personal Informatics’. In Extended
Abstracts of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI EA ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Article LBW542,
6 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3188530

[24] Melissa Edmonds, Hugh McGuire, and Jonathan R Price. 2004. Exercise
therapy for chronic fatigue syndrome. Cochrane database of systematic
reviews 3 (2004).

[25] Emerge Australia. 2019.

(webpage).

Basis
managing-symptoms-daily-basis/

Managing Symptoms on a Daily
https://emerge.org.au/diagnosis/

[26] Michael Falk Hvidberg, Louse Schouborg Brinth, Anne V. Olesen,
Karin D. Petersen, and Lars Ehlers. 2018. The Health-Related Quality
of Life for Patients with Myalgic Encephalomyelitis / Chronic
Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS).
PLoS ONE 10, 7 (2018), e0132421.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0132421

[27] Sergio Felipe, Aneesha Singh, Caroline Bradley, Amanda C. de C.
Williams, and Nadia Bianchi-Berthouze. 2015. Roles for personal
informatics in chronic pain. In Pervasive Computing Technologies for
Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2015 9th International Conference on.
IEEE, 161–168.

[28] Keiji Fukuda, Stephen E Straus, Ian Hickie, Michael C Sharpe, James G
Dobbins, and Anthony Komaroff. 1994. The chronic fatigue syndrome:
a comprehensive approach to its definition and study. Annals of Internal
Medicine 121, 12 (1994), 953–959.

[29] Keith Geraghty, Mark Hann, and Stoyan Kurtev. 2017. Myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome patients’ reports of
symptom changes following cognitive behavioural therapy, graded
exercise therapy and pacing treatments: Analysis of a primary survey
compared with secondary surveys. Journal of Health Psychology 0, 0
(2017), 1359105317726152. https://doi.org/10.1177/1359105317726152
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/1359105317726152 PMID: 28847166.
[30] Ellen M Goudsmit, Jo Nijs, Leonard A Jason, and Karen E Wallman.
2012. Pacing as a strategy to improve energy management in myalgic
encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome: a consensus document.
Disability and rehabilitation 34, 13 (2012), 1140–1147.

[31] Stephen T Holgate, Anthony L Komaroff, Dennis Mangan, and Simon
Wessely. 2011. Chronic fatigue syndrome: understanding a complex
illness. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 12, 9 (2011), 539.

[32] Leonard Jason, Susan Torres-Harding, and Mary Gloria Njoku. 2006.
The Face of CFS in the U.S. The CIFIDS Chronicle (01 2006), 16–21.
[33] Leonard A Jason. 2017. The PACE trial missteps on pacing and patient
selection. Journal of Health Psychology 22, 9 (2017), 1141–1145.
[34] Leonard A Jason, Molly Brown, Abigail Brown, Meredyth Evans,
Samantha Flores, Elisa Grant-Holler, and Madison Sunnquist. 2013. En-
ergy conservation/envelope theory interventions. Fatigue: Biomedicine,
Health & Behavior 1, 1-2 (2013), 27–42.

[35] Leonard A Jason, Meredyth Evans, Suzanna So, Jilian Scott, and Abigail
Brown. 2015. Problems in defining post-exertional malaise. Journal
of Prevention & Intervention in the Community 43, 1 (2015), 20–31.
[36] Leonard A Jason, Judith A Richman, Alfred W Rademaker, Karen M
Jordan, Audrius V Plioplys, Renee R Taylor, William McCready,
Cheng-Fang Huang, and Sigita Plioplys. 1999. A community-based
study of chronic fatigue syndrome. Archives of Internal Medicine 159,
18 (1999), 2129–2137.

[37] Simon L. Jones and Ryan Kelly. 2018. Dealing With Information Over-
load in Multifaceted Personal Informatics Systems. Human-Computer
Interaction 33, 1 (2018), 1–48. https://doi.org/10.1080/07370024.2017.
1302334 arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/07370024.2017.1302334

[38] Predrag Klasnja and Wanda Pratt. 2012. Healthcare in the pocket:
mapping the space of mobile-phone health interventions. Journal of
Biomedical Informatics 45, 1 (2012), 184–198.

[39] Anthony L Komaroff and Dedra Buchwald. 1991. Symptoms and
signs of chronic fatigue syndrome. Reviews of Infectious Diseases 13,
Supplement_1 (1991), S8–S11.

[40] Daphne Kos, Inge Van Eupen, Jill Meirte, Deborah Van Cauwenbergh,
Greta Moorkens, Mira Meeus, and Jo Nijs. 2015. Activity pacing self-
management in chronic fatigue syndrome: a randomized controlled trial.
American Journal of Occupational Therapy 69, 5 (2015), 6905290020p1–
6905290020p11. https://doi.org/10.5014/ajot.2015.016287

[41] Kyriaki Kouyanou, Charles E Pither, and Simon Wessely. 1997.
Iatrogenic factors and chronic pain. Psychosomatic Medicine 59, 6
(1997), 597–604.

[42] Eliana M. Lacerda, Caroline C. Kingdon, Erinna W. Bowman, and Luis
Nacul. 2018. Using a participatory approach to develop and implement
the UK ME/CFS Biobank. Fatigue: Biomedicine, Health & Behavior
6, 1 (2018), 1–4.
https://doi.org/10.1080/21641846.2018.1396021
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1080/21641846.2018.1396021

[43] Krupp LB, Sliwinski M, Masur DM, Friedberg F, and Coyle PK. 1994.
Cognitive functioning and depression in patients with chronic fatigue
syndrome and multiple sclerosis. Archives of Neurology 51, 7 (1994),
705–710. https://doi.org/10.1001/archneur.1994.00540190089021
[44] Anastasia Aldelina Lijadi and Gertina Johanna van Schalkwyk. 2015. On-
line Facebook focus group research of hard-to-reach participants. Inter-
national Journal of Qualitative Methods 14, 5 (2015), 1609406915621383.
[45] James J. Lin, Lena Mamykina, Silvia Lindtner, Gregory Delajoux, and
Henry B. Strub. 2006. Fish’N’Steps: Encouraging Physical Activity with
an Interactive Computer Game. In Proceedings of the 8th International
Conference on Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp’06). Springer-Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 261–278. https://doi.org/10.1007/11853565_16
[46] Lena Mamykina, Elizabeth Mynatt, Patricia Davidson, and Daniel
Greenblatt. 2008. MAHI: Investigation of Social Scaffolding for Reflec-
tive Thinking in Diabetes Management. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’08). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 477–486. https://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357131
[47] Madhavan Mani, David J Kavanagh, Leanne Hides, and Stoyan R
Review and Evaluation of Mindfulness-Based
JMIR mHealth uHealth 3, 3 (19 Aug 2015), e82.

Stoyanov. 2015.
iPhone Apps.
https://doi.org/10.2196/mhealth.4328

[48] Mollie McKillop, Lena Mamykina, and Noémie Elhadad. 2018. Design-
ing in the Dark: Eliciting Self-tracking Dimensions for Understanding
Enigmatic Disease. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
Article 565, 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174139
[49] Aaron S Miller, Joseph A Cafazzo, and Emily Seto. 2016. A game
plan: Gamification design principles in mHealth applications
for chronic disease management. Health Informatics Journal 22,
2 (2016), 184–193.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1460458214537511
arXiv:https://doi.org/10.1177/1460458214537511 PMID: 24986104.
[50] Christine Miserandino. 2003. The Spoon Theory. Available Online.
https://butyoudontlooksick.com/articles/written-by-christine/
the-spoon-theory/

[51] Florian ‘Floyd’ Mueller, Frank Vetere, Martin R. Gibbs, Jesper
Kjeldskov, Sonja Pedell, and Steve Howard. 2005. Hug over a
Distance. In CHI ’05 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems (CHI EA ’05). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1673–1676.
https://doi.org/10.1145/1056808.1056994

[52] Michael J Muller. 2003. Participatory design: the third space in HCI.
Human-computer interaction: Development process 4235 (2003), 165–185.

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 222Page 12[53] Elizabeth L. Murnane, Saeed Abdullah, Mark Matthews, Matthew
Kay, Julie A. Kientz, Tanzeem Choudhury, Geri Gay, and Dan Cosley.
2016. Mobile Manifestations of Alertness: Connecting Biological
Rhythms with Patterns of Smartphone App Use. In Proceedings of the
18th International Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with
Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
465–477. https://doi.org/10.1145/2935334.2935383

[54] Jo Nijs, Kenny De Meirleir, and William Duquet. 2004. Kinesiophobia in
chronic fatigue syndrome: Assessment and associations with disability1.
Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation 85, 10 (2004), 1586–1592.
Self-
International Jour-
Interaction 31, 12 (2015), 869–881.

Care Technologies and Collaboration.
nal of Human–Computer
https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.2015.1067498

[55] Francisco Nunes and Geraldine Fitzpatrick. 2015.

[56] Francisco Nunes, Paula Alexandra Silva, João Cevada, Ana Cor-
reia Barros, and Luís Teixeira. 2016. User interface design guidelines
for smartphone applications for people with Parkinson’s disease.
Universal Access in the Information Society 15, 4 (01 Nov 2016), 659–679.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10209-015-0440-1

[57] Anthony Ocon. 2013. Caught in the thickness of brain fog: exploring
the cognitive symptoms of Chronic Fatigue Syndrome. Frontiers in
Physiology 4 (2013), 63. https://doi.org/10.3389/fphys.2013.00063
[58] Tom Owen, Jennifer Pearson, Harold Thimbleby, and George Buchanan.
2015. ConCap: Designing to Empower Individual Reflection on Chronic
Conditions Using Mobile Apps. In Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction with Mobile Devices
and Services (MobileHCI ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 105–114.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2785830.2785881

[59] Davy Preuveneers and Yolande Berbers. 2008. Mobile Phones Assisting
with Health Self-care: A Diabetes Case Study. In Proceedings of the
10th International Conference on Human Computer Interaction with
Mobile Devices and Services (MobileHCI ’08). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
177–186. https://doi.org/10.1145/1409240.1409260

[60] Mitchell E Tidy E Price, JR and V Hunot. 2008. Cognitive behaviour ther-
apy for chronic fatigue syndrome in adults. Cochrane Database of System-
atic Reviews 3 (2008). https://doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD001027.pub2
[61] Judith B Prins, Gijs Bleijenberg, Ellen Bazelmans, Lammy D Elving,
Theo M de Boo, Johan L Severens, Gert Jan van der Wilt, Philip
Spinhoven, and Jos WM Van der Meer. 2001. Cognitive behaviour
therapy for chronic fatigue syndrome: a multicentre randomised
controlled trial. The Lancet 357, 9259 (2001), 841–847.

[62] Katharine A Rimes and Janet Wingrove. 2013. Mindfulness-based cogni-
tive therapy for people with chronic fatigue syndrome still experiencing
excessive fatigue after cognitive behaviour therapy: A pilot randomized
study. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy 20, 2 (2013), 107–117.
[63] Ann Marie Roepke, Sara R Jaffee, Olivia M Riffle, Jane McGonigal, Rose
Broome, and Bez Maxwell. 2015. Randomized controlled trial of Su-
perBetter, a smartphone-based/internet-based self-help tool to reduce
depressive symptoms. Games for Health Journal 4, 3 (2015), 235–246.
[64] Daniela K. Rosner, Saba Kawas, Wenqi Li, Nicole Tilly, and Yi-Chen
Sung. 2016. Out of Time, Out of Place: Reflections on Design
Workshops As a Research Method. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & Social
Computing (CSCW ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1131–1141.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820021

[65] Jessica Schroeder, Chia-Fang Chung, Daniel A. Epstein, Ravi Karkar,
Adele Parsons, Natalia Murinova, James Fogarty, and Sean A. Munson.

2018. Examining Self-Tracking by People with Migraine: Goals, Needs,
and Opportunities in a Chronic Health Condition. In Proceedings of
the 2018 Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’18). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 135–148. https://doi.org/10.1145/3196709.3196738
[66] Jessica Schroeder, Jane Hoffswell, Chia-Fang Chung, James Fogarty,
Sean Munson, and Jasmine Zia. 2017. Supporting Patient-Provider
Collaboration to Identify Individual Triggers Using Food and Symptom
Journals. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Sup-
ported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW ’17). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 1726–1739. https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998276

[67] M.C. Sharpe, L.C. Archard, J.E. Banatvala, L.K. Borysiewicz, A.W. Clare,
A. David, R.H. Edwards, K.E. Hawton, H.P. Lambert, and R.J. Lane. 1991.
A report–chronic fatigue syndrome: guidelines for research. Journal
of the Royal Society of Medicine 84, 2 (1991), 118–121.

[68] Christina Surawy, Jill Roberts, and Amy Silver. 2005. The effect of
mindfulness training on mood and measures of fatigue, activity, and
quality of life in patients with chronic fatigue syndrome on a hospital
waiting list: a series of exploratory studies. Behavioural and Cognitive
Psychotherapy 33, 1 (2005), 103–109.

[69] David R. Thomas. 2006. A general inductive approach for analyzing
qualitative evaluation data. American Journal of Evaluation 27, 2 (2006),
237–246.

[70] FN Twisk and Michael Maes. 2009. A review on cognitive behavo-
rial therapy (CBT) and graded exercise therapy (GET) in myalgic
encephalomyelitis (ME)/chronic fatigue syndrome (CFS): CBT/GET
is not only ineffective and not evidence-based, but also potentially
harmful for many patients with ME/CFS. Neuro Endocrinology Letters
30, 3 (2009), 284–299.

[71] Boudewijn Van Houdenhove and Patrick Luyten. 2008. Customizing
treatment of chronic fatigue syndrome and fibromyalgia: the role of
perpetuating factors. Psychosomatics 49, 6 (2008), 470–477.

[72] Jan H. M. M. Vercoulen, Caroline M. A. Swanink, Jan F. M. Fennis,
Joep M. D. Galama, Jos W. M. van der Meer, and Gijs Bleijenberg. 1994.
Dimensional assessment of chronic fatigue syndrome.
Journal of
Psychosomatic Research 38, 5 (1994), 383–392.

[73] Norma C Ware. 1992. Suffering and the social construction of illness:
The delegitimation of illness experience in chronic fatigue syndrome.
Medical Anthropology Quarterly 6, 4 (1992), 347–361.

[74] Carolyn Wilshire, Tom Kindlon, Alem Matthees, and Simon McGrath.
2017. Can patients with chronic fatigue syndrome really recover
after graded exercise or cognitive behavioural therapy? A critical
commentary and preliminary re-analysis of the PACE trial. Fatigue:
Biomedicine, Health & Behavior 5, 1 (2017), 43–56.

[75] Carolyn E. Wilshire, Tom Kindlon, Robert Courtney, Alem Matthees,
David Tuller, Keith Geraghty, and Bruce Levin. 2018. Rethinking the
treatment of chronic fatigue syndrome—a reanalysis and evaluation of
findings from a recent major trial of graded exercise and CBT. BMC Psy-
chology 6, 1 (22 Mar 2018), 6. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40359-018-0218-3
[76] Anette Winger, Mirjam Ekstedt, Vegard B Wyller, and Sølvi Helseth.
‘Sometimes it feels as if the world goes on without me’:
2014.
Adolescents’ experiences of living with chronic fatigue syndrome.
Journal of Clinical Nursing 23, 17-18 (2014), 2649–2657.

[77] Rayoung Yang, Eunice Shin, Mark W. Newman, and Mark S. Ackerman.
2015. When Fitness Trackers Don’t ‘Fit’: End-user Difficulties in the
Assessment of Personal Tracking Device Accuracy. In Proceedings
of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
623–634. https://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804269

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 222Page 13