Persuasive Technology in the Real World: A Study of 
Long-Term Use of Activity Sensing Devices for Fitness 
Thomas Zimmermann 
Gail C. Murphy 
Microsoft Research 
University of British Columbia 
tzimmer@microsoft.com 
murphy@cs.ubc.ca 

Thomas Fritz, Elaine M. Huang 
Univeristy of Zurich 
{fritz,huang}@ifi.uzh.ch 

ABSTRACT 
Persuasive  technology  to  motivate  healthy  behavior  is  a 
growing  area  of  research  within  HCI  and  ubiquitous 
computing. The emergence of commercial wearable devices 
for  tracking  health-  and  fitness-related  activities  arguably 
represents  the  first  widespread  adoption  of  dedicated 
ubiquitous  persuasive  technology.  The  recent  ubiquity  of 
commercial systems allows us to learn about their value and 
use  in  truly  “in  the  wild”  contexts  and  understand  how 
practices  evolve  over  long-term,  naturalistic  use.  We 
present  a  study  with  30  participants  who  had  adopted 
wearable activity-tracking devices of their own volition and 
had  continued  to  use  them  for  between  3  and  54  months. 
The findings, which both support and contrast with those of 
previous  research,  paint  a  picture  of  the evolving  benefits 
and practices surrounding these emerging technologies over 
long periods of use. They also serve as the basis for design 
implications for personal informatics technologies for long-
term health and fitness support. 

Author Keywords 
Personal 
monitoring; wearable sensing; health; behavior change 

informatics;  persuasive 

technology;  activity 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.2 User Interfaces, H5.m Miscellaneous. 

General Terms 
Design, Human Factors 

INTRODUCTION 
Emerging  persuasive  technology  and  ubiquitous  wearable 
sensors  offer  much  promise  for  improving  health  and 
research  personal 
fitness  practices.  Commercial  and 
informatics  systems  that  employ  these  sensors  enable  the 
automated  tracking  of  personal  information  and  activities, 
such  as  sleep  and  physical  activity.  Along  with 
developments in the sensing technology itself, research has 
also  made  great  strides  in  understanding  other  aspects  of 
these technologies, such as how their design affects activity 
and  behavior  [9,  24],  how  to  use  visualization  to  motivate 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that  copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full 
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others 
than  the  author(s)  must  be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy 
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 

CHI 2014, April 26 - May 01 2014, Toronto, ON, Canada 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-2473-1/14/04…$15.00.  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557383 

activities  and  provide  awareness  [7,  13],  how  feedback  is 
understood  and  used  [12],  and  how  such  technologies 
should be evaluated [11]. 

We  aim  to  learn  what  value  these  systems  provide  even 
after  months  or  years  of  use,  whether  and  how  this  value 
changes over time, and how persuasive personal informatics 
technologies might be better designed to provide long-term 
support. We build upon and extend the findings of previous 
research  in  the  area  by  contributing  a  study  of  in-the-wild 
use  of  activity  monitoring  devices  by  long-term  users  in  a 
non-experimental  context.  Klasnja  et  al.  have  identified 
field studies as an important approach for understanding the 
impacts  of  these  types  of  technologies  [11].  The  recent 
emergence  of  commercial  wearable  devices  designed  to 
track  and  motivate  physical  activity,  such  as  the  Fitbit 
(fitbit.com)  and  Nike+  FuelBand  (nike.com/fuelband), 
provides a valuable opportunity to study the naturalistic use 
of  these  technologies,  and  the  practices  and  perspectives 
that emerge over continued long-term use. 

Although  not  everyone  who  tries  a  wearable  activity 
monitor  continues  to  use  it  in  the  long  term,  we  focus  on 
those  who  have  done  so  and  integrated  it  into  their  daily 
practices. Investigating the experiences of people who have 
adopted  these  technologies  “organically”  and  continued  to 
use  them  over  time  offers  the  opportunity  to  study  certain 
contexts  and  aspects  of  use  not  possible  in  shorter-term 
experimental deployments. It also affords the opportunity to 
see  how  findings  of  previous  shorter  studies  hold  over 
longer-term  use.  In  particular,  we  visit  such  issues  as  the 
value  of  system-provided  metrics  as  people’s  fitness  goals 
and  activities  change,  the  challenges  of  data  sharing  and 
identifying relevant social networks, and the ways in which 
the  design  of  self-monitoring  systems  influence  people’s 
activities and conceptualizations of healthy behavior. 

This  work  offers  several  contributions  to  the  body  of 
knowledge  on  personal 
informatics  and  persuasive 
technology.  First,  it  provides  a  rich  understanding  of  the 
influence  and  role  of  wearable  persuasive  technology  for 
activity  tracking.  Second,  it  reveals  perspectives  and 
practices of long-term use that add depth to the findings of 
previous  experimental  and  shorter  term  deployments  of 
related  technologies.  Although  in  some  cases  our  findings 
contrasted  with  those  of  previous  work,  the  bulk  of  our 
findings  confirm  them,  thereby  adding  richness  to  our 
understanding  of  such  technologies  as  well  as  lending 
credence to the findings of shorter term studies. Finally, our 

Session: Activity RecognitionCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada487 
 
 
 
 
work  offers  a  set  of  targeted  implications  for  designing 
personal  informatics  technologies  intended  for  long-term 
use. 

to 

applications 

RELATED WORK 
Personal  informatics  systems  to  support  health  and  fitness 
are  a  growing  area  of  interest.  Research  and  commercial 
track  and  monitor 
systems  have  been  developed 
information  such  as  weight,  steps,  sleep,  and  overall 
activity.  Munson  proposes  a  spectrum  of  personal 
informatics 
reflective 
technologies  intended  to  support  insight  into  one’s  own 
behavior to persuasive technologies [15]. As Michie et. al. 
discuss,  there  is  a  wide  range  of  approaches  to  achieve 
behavior  change  [14].  Persuasive  technologies  employ 
varied  strategies  for  influencing  behavior  and  activities, 
such  as  those  described  by  Fogg,  most  notably  self-
monitoring and conditioning [10]. Self-monitoring is one of 
the  most  prevalent  persuasive  technology  strategies  [11], 
but technologies often employ multiple strategies.  

ranging 

from 

A  variety  of  monitoring  devices  have  been  studied  and 
analyzed  for  their  persuasive  influence  on  practices  and 
behavior. For example Tudor-Locke et al. looked at the use 
of simple pedometers for measuring and motivating activity 
[24]. Based on a quantitative synthesis of literature, Bravata 
et al. found that pedometers in combination with a step goal 
can significantly increase physical activity [5]. The average 
duration  of  the  synthesized  studies  was  18  weeks  and 
Bravata et al. point out that the long-term durability of these 
changes is unknown.  

that  attempt 

In recent years, HCI and ubiquitous computing research has 
produced  more  sophisticated  devices 
to 
persuade  using  various representations  of  sensed  activity 
data.  The  most  prominent  example  is  UbiFit,  which 
combined  activity  sensing  with  a  glanceable  visualization 
of  activity  [7,  9].  In  a  field  deployment  of  the  system,  the 
researchers  found  that  the  visualization  helped  participants 
maintain  activity  levels  by  providing  positive  feedback. 
Other  systems  attempt  to  persuade  through  coaching  and 
advising  metaphors.  For  example,  Flowie,  a  persuasive 
virtual  coach  intended  to  motivate  elderly  people  to  walk 
more  was  deployed  to  two  participants  in  an  11-day  study 
and  identified  types  of  feedback  that  were  most  promising 
for motivation. Laura, a system with a similar goal, used an 
animated  relational  agent  as  an  exercise  advisor  [4]. 
Participants  increased  their  walking  by  215%  during  the 
trial  period.  Li  explored  the  use  of  contextual  information 
as  a  supplement  to  performance  data  in  the  IMPACT 
system.  A  multi-week  evaluation  of  the  system  revealed 
that  contextual  information  is  useful  for  retrospective 
interpretation of activities [12].  

Researchers  have  also  considered  social  aspects  of 
persuasive monitoring technologies. Chick Clique, a system 
geared  towards  sharing  health  information  among  teenage 
girls, was evaluated in a 6-day deployment, which led to the 
finding  that  data  sharing  could  be  a  powerful  motivator 

[23]. Fish ‘n’ Steps compared shared and individual use of 
a fish tank visualization of activity, and found no significant 
differences in activity levels between the conditions during 
the  deployment  [12].  Houston,  which  combined  journaling 
with  automated  activity 
tracking  was  deployed  and 
evaluated,  leading  to  design  implications  regarding  social 
pressure  and  support  [6].  Prasad  et  al.  investigated  related 
issues  surrounding  the  use  of  Fitbit  in  a  one-week  study, 
specifically looking privacy concerns related to data sharing 
[19]. The findings suggested that people are less willing to 
share  personal  demographic  information  than  information 
collected  by  the  device.  Such  concerns  are  consistent  with 
the tension Newman et. al note between sharing health and 
behavior goals with others in online forums and the need to 
maintain  a  positive  impression  of  one’s  self  to  the  social 
community  [17].  It  should  be  noted  that  the  various  trials 
and  deployments  of  previous  technologies  described  here 
were  short  to  moderate  in  length,  ranging  from  6  days 
(Chick  Clique)  to  14  weeks  (Houston)  in  duration.  Our 
study  builds  upon  and  generally  confirms  the  findings  of 
these  previous  deployments,  considering  similar  issues  of 
motivation, practices and social use, with a particular focus 
they change or persist over long-term use. 

Monitoring devices are often limited in the activity that can 
be  sensed,  leading  to  the  need  for  integrating  data  from 
multiple sources to get a broader view on health and fitness. 
Systems  that  require  more  effort  on  the  part  of  users  for 
tracking activities are less likely to be successfully adopted. 
For example, research by Ahtinen et al. showed that manual 
entering of health data was burdensome and led to declining 
use of wellness applications [1]. Tollmar et al. looked at the 
effects of health information “mashups” that integrate data 
from multiple sensors and sources and discovered that these 
combinations  allowed  people  to  gain  novel  insights  about 
their wellness [22]. 

intended 

technologies 

In  general,  persuasive 
to  spur 
behavior change are challenging to evaluate because change 
can only be proven if it persists over a long period of time. 
Klasjna  et  al.  therefore  propose  other  approaches  for 
evaluating  the  role  of  these  technologies,  including  field 
deployments  to  understand  their  use  [11].  As  further 
motivation  for  our  research,  a  recent  survey  of  fifty-four 
people indicated a high value for long-term information that 
is often not considered by studies with limited timespan [3]. 
We  therefore  believe  that  studying  the  long-term  use  and 
influence of these devices is necessary for building a more 
complete  understanding  of 
the  value  of  persuasive 
technology for motivating activity. 

BACKGROUND 
In  addition  to  the  research  prototypes  mentioned,  several 
commercial wearable activity trackers have been released in 
recent years. Our study population included users of many 
such  devices, 
the  Nike+  Fuelband, 
Jawbone  UP  (jawbone.com),  Striiv  (striiv.com),  and 
Bodybugg  (bodybugg.com),  and  many  of  the  participants 
had  tried  multiple  types  of  devices  or  multiple  versions  of 

including  Fitbit, 

Session: Activity RecognitionCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada488 
60s  who  had  been  using  such  a  device  for  at  least  three 
months (Table 1.) We chose three months as the minimum 
length  of  use  as  previous  experimental  wearable  activity 
sensors  for  fitness  had  typically  considered  use  periods  of 
three months or less. Most participants had been using their 
devices for substantially longer; our longest-use participant 
had  been  using  activity  tracking  devices  for  54  months  at 
the  time  of  interview,  and  the  overall  mean  length  of  use 
across participants was 14.8 months. 

Participants were recruited through a variety of approaches 
including snowball sampling, recruiting emails, and posts to 
online  forums  such  as  the  Fitbit  community.  Participants 
came  from  a  variety  of  professions,  including  a  business 
development  expert,  a  teacher’s  aid,  an  attorney,  and 
students, however, overall our interview population slanted 
towards  people  in  technical  professions,  such  as  software 
developers,  and  software  project  managers  (Table  1).  This 
proportion  may  be  partly  attributable  to  the  snowball 
sampling approach through which we recruited participants, 
but also to the fact that the early adopters of these types of 
devices are likely to be tech-interested individuals. 

Twenty-four  participants  were  using  Fitbit  at  the  time  of 
four  participants  used  a  FuelBand,  one 
interview, 
participant  used  a  Jawbone  and  one  participant  used  a 
Striiv. Five participants had previously used other types of 
activity  monitoring  technologies  (see  Table  1.)  It  is 
important to note that our participants’ experiences are not 
necessarily  representative  of  experiences  with  wearable 
activity  sensing  in  general,  as  we  are  focusing  specifically 
on  people  who  have  continued  to  use  the  technology  for 
long  periods  of  time.  We  did  not  include  people  who  had 
stopped  using  these  devices  and  this  work  is  therefore 
limited  in  the  insight  it  can  offer  about  why  these 
technologies might fail to be adopted. In addition, as some 
of  our  participants  were  recruited  from  online  forums 
focused  on  these  technologies,  it  is  likely  that  our 
population  overall  is  more  active  and  enthusiastic  about 
their devices than the general population of wearers. 

Interviews  lasted  between  25  and  45  minutes  in  duration, 
and  were  conducted  in  person  when  possible  (18),  and 
otherwise  over the  phone  or  Skype  (12).  The  general 
interview format commenced with basic questions about the 
participant’s reasons for acquiring or using their device, and 
the  length  of  time  that  they  had  had  it.  This  was  followed 
by more open questions geared towards eliciting anecdotes 
and  experiences.  We  explored  topics  such  as  individuals’ 
daily  practices  with  the  technologies,  how  they  used  the 
data  the  devices  provided,  their  experiences  with  social 
aspects  of  the  system,  and  how  their  activities  and  use  of 
the devices had changed over time.  

Interviews were audio recorded and transcribed. To analyze 
the  data,  we  used  a  combination  of  inductive  open  coding 
and  closed  coding  with  codes  derived  from  concepts  in 
related literature to identify important themes. In this work, 
we  present  some  of  the  most  prominent  emerging  themes, 

Figure 1. Nike+ Fuelband (left) and Fitbit Ultra (right) 

the same device. Although there are variations in what these 
devices  sense,  record,  and  display,  they  share  certain 
commonalities.  

The devices vary in form factor, including arm bands, wrist 
bands, and or clip-on models (Fig. 1). Some have passive or 
interactive displays that can show limited representations of 
the  wearer’s  data.  Several  of  the  systems  also  provide 
support  for  other  aspects  of  health  and  wellness,  such  as 
sleep tracking and food logging. In this work, however, we 
focus solely on the activity tracking functions. 

The  devices  make  use  of  different  sensing  technologies, 
such as accelerometers and altimeters to track movement or 
activity. They also provide ways of viewing the information 
through various visualizations on websites, mobile apps, or 
on  the  devices  themselves.  Most  systems  provide  multiple 
representations of the activity, including concrete measures 
such  as  step  count,  distance  traveled,  or  flights  of  stairs 
climbed,  as  well  as  abstracted  compound  representations 
such as Nike’s “fuel” points or FitBit’s “activity score.”  

With  respect  to  persuasion  strategies  identified  by  Fogg 
[10], all of these technologies can be classified primarily as 
self-monitoring  technologies.  Nearly  all  of  them  also 
employ  Fogg’s  notion  of  conditioning   and  Michie  et  al’s 
notion  of  contingent  rewards  [14]  to  some  extent  in  the 
form of rewards and motivational messages displayed to the 
user.  These  features  vary  in  their  degree  of  explicit 
persuasion,  ranging  from  badges  that  reflect  achievements 
to fitness challenges and competitions offered to the wearer. 
Most of them also allow the wearer to set explicit goals, an 
important  strategy  identified  by  Consolvo  et  al.  [8]  Nearly 
all  of  the  systems  support  data  sharing  through  online 
communities and social networking features on websites or 
apps,  another  potentially  valuable  strategy  identified  by 
Munson et al. [16] and Michie et al. [14].  

METHOD AND PARTICIPANTS 
To learn about the use and influence of these technologies 
on  people’s  activity,  we  conducted  a  study  using  in-depth 
semi-structured interviews. We recruited 30 participants (16 
female,  14  male)  in various  cities  in  North  America  ( 23), 
Europe  (6),  and  Asia  (1)  between  their  early  20s  and  mid 

Session: Activity RecognitionCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada489 
 
Table 1. Summary of participant information. 

Parti-
cipant 

Gender 

Months 
of Use 

Occupation 

Activity Sensing 

Devices Used       
(Current Bold) 
Fitbit 
Fitbit 

Fitbit 

male 
female 

female 

male 

pedometer,3Fitbits 

female 
female 
female 
female 
female 

male 

male 
male 
female 
male 
male 
male 

male 

bodybugg, 2Fitbits 
pedometer, Fitbit 
2 Fitbits 
FuelBand 
3 Fitbits 

2 Fitbits 

5 Fitbits 
FuelBand 
5 Fitbits, Striiv 
Fitbit 
FuelBand 
Fitbit 

Fitbit 

P1 
P2 

P3 

P4 

P5 
P6 
P7 
P8 
P9 

P10 

P11 
P12 
P13 
P14 
P15 
P16 

P17 

P18 

female 

4 Fitbits 

P19 

male 

P20 

P21 

male 

female 

P22 

male 

3 bodybuggs,        
1 Jawbone Up,        

5 Fitbits 
FuelBand 

Fitbug, Striiv,          

3 Fitbits 

4 Fitbits 

P23 

P24 

P25 

female 

Fitbit 

male 

Jawbone UP 

female 

Fitbit 

P26 

female 

3 Fitbits 

P27 

female 

2 Fitbits 

P28 

male 

Fitbit 

P29 

female 

2 Fitbits 

P30 

female 

2 Fitbits 

3 
3 

6 

10 

18 
7 
18 
4.5 
11 

11 

11 
3.5 
9 
16 
5 
7 

6 

12 

54 

8 

16 

21 

12 

5 

21 

42 

42 

8 

18 

22 

Usability 
Professor 
Operations 
Specialist 
Software 
Developer 
Student 
Director 
Professor 
Student 
Student 
Program 
Manager 
Director 
Researcher 
Attorney 
Director 
Director 
Researcher 
Service 
Engineer 
Researcher 

Patent 
litigater 

Retail 

Psychologist 

Military 
Personnel 
Teacher’s 
Aid 
Retail 
Web 
Designer 
Business 
Developer 
Volunteer 
Coordinator 
Finance 
Counselor 
Health 
Professional 
Loss 
Mitigation 
Manager 

most  notably  those  that  illustrate  the  dynamic  use  and 
influence of these the technologies over time.  

FINDINGS 
In this section we present the primary findings of our study. 
We begin by providing a general portrayal of people’s use 
and perspectives of their devices. Subsequently we examine 
some  of  the  specific  ways  in  which  these  technologies 

influence  fitness  and  activity  among  long-term  users.  We 
unpack several phenomena that illustrate how people derive 
motivation  and  value  from  these  systems,  despite  changes 
in  practices  and  needs  that  arise  over  long-term  use.  In 
particular we focus on the ways in which metrics, data, and 
social networking features provided by the system influence 
people’s  engagement  with  their  personal  fitness  and  the 
technologies. 

General effects 
Most  of  the  participants  had  integrated  the  devices  deeply 
into their routines and daily practices, wearing them either 
all of the time or putting them on first thing in the morning 
and taking them off just before bed. They described strong 
attachments to them: 

“I'm a little obsessed with it. I look at it all the time … I'm always 
curious,  like  where  I  am  at  what  point  of  the  day.”  (P30,  22 
months) 

“I feel I find it hard not to wear it.” (P29, 18 months) 

“There's also I think, some degree of psychological attachment to 
the thing, [losing it is] kind of like when you lose your cell phone. 
It's  weird  to  have  something  that  you  have  with  you  all  the  time 
and  you're  constantly  sort  of  playing  with  disappear,  like  you've 
lost something significant.” (P19, 4.5 years) 

Continued  and  routinized  use  of  the  devices  did  not 
that  wearers 
necessarily  mean 
stayed  consistently 
enthusiastic  about 
them.  Although  some  participants 
remained  excited  about  them,  others  indicated  that  early 
novelty  had  worn  off  and  given  way  to  more  moderate 
attitudes despite continued use: 

“I liked it a lot in the beginning and I think now I’ve sort of fallen 
out  of  love  with  it.  You  know  it’s  like  you’ve  been  married  for  a 
long time and… it’s all right but the excitement has gone.” (P21, 
16 months) 

“That might be something that’s changed since I’ve had it a while. 
I  don’t  really  feel  like  an  urgent  impulse  to  meet  my  goals  and 
have  it  validate  my  activity.  I  do  wear  it  and  I  do  look  at  the 
numbers,  but  it  doesn’t  necessarily  affect  my  feelings  day  to  day 
that much at this point.” (P27, 3.5 years) 

Long-term users developed a high degree of awareness of 
the  “value”  of  their  activities  in  the  context  of  the 
measurements  provided  by 
the  systems.  Participants 
revealed a detailed understanding of both routine and non-
routine activities: 

“I know that if I stay home and work all day … I'm only going to 
hit like, you know, 3,000 or 4,000 in the apartment. And I know if 
I'm [at work] … I could get to 8000 really easily. So I'd like to be 
over  10,000,  maybe  around  12,000.  You  know,  and  then  I  feel 
really good about myself if I hit 15,000 or 20,000. But that doesn't 
really  happen;  those  are  the  days  I  don't  do  any  work.”  (P5,  18 
months) 

 “When  I  went  skiing  I  knew  that  I  was  definitely  going  to  be 
exceeding my goal, so... I manipulated it a litte bit so that I could 
say,  okay  if  a  regular  day  of  skiing,  let's  say,  is  4000  points,  I'm 
going to set my goal to maybe 4,300. So that way I knew that if I 

Session: Activity RecognitionCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada490 
felt  exhausted  by  the  end  of  the  day,  I  should  have  reached  my 
goal.” (P20, 8 months) 

Participants  described  the  immediate  impacts  of  the 
devices on their activities, such as seeing a low step count 
and then walking to a shop to pick up coffee rather than to a 
nearby  kitchen  (P12).  It  was  clear  that  the  numerical 
feedback for most participants could reinforce and motivate 
activities, as in one particularly extreme example: 

“I was at I think 17 flights, and I thought, oh, I could get to 25. I 
just started walking up and down the steps while I was reading my 
Kindle. I hit 25 and I was just getting warmed up and I thought, 
well, maybe I'll see if I can't hit 50. At 50 I was getting warm, but I 
wasn't  tired  ...  so  I  kept  going.  After  I  hit  100  floors,  I  decided 
okay I probably ought to cool down now because it was 11:00 at 
night … and I just walked at a slower pace while I was reading for 
the next hour, and I ended up having my steps up over 20,000 and 
my stairs at 100 that day.” (P17, 6 months) 

Aside from looking at immediate effects on activity, much 
persuasive  technology  research  has  focused  on  supporting 
and  evaluating  longer  term  behavior  change  and  health 
effects,  a  challenge  that  has  been  identified  as  difficult  to 
measure and assess in less than a year’s time [11]. Although 
explicitly  evaluating  behavior  change  was  not  the  goal  of 
this research, we were able to gain some insight as to how 
long-term users viewed their own changes in practice. Most 
participants  reported  that  the  use  of  the  device  had 
motivated  or  helped  them  make durable  changes,  such  as 
walking more, taking the  stairs, or standing while working 
rather  than  sitting.  Twenty-five  participants  explicitly 
mentioned  changes  in  their  routines  or  behavior  that  they 
felt were lasting and profound: 

“So  initially  it  was,  oh,  okay.  Your  practice  needs  to  change  a 
little  bit  if  you  account  to  get  this  extra  health  benefit  in.  I’ve 
figured  out  ways  to  do  that,  and  now  they’re  part  of  my  daily 
practice.” (P7, 18 months) 

“For 15 years I had an unhealthy BMI. I could not figure out how 
to  lose  weight.  I  was  just  doing  the  same  old  thing,  eating  the 
same old crappy fast food. And once I got this FitBit…it just really 
opened  my  eyes  to  a  healthy  lifestyle.  I’ve  done  like  180  degree 
turn to where I was before.” (P22, 21 months) 

Although  we  also  were  not  evaluating  direct  effects  on 
physical  or  mental  health  (e.g.,  changes  in  weight,  blood 
pressure,  self-esteem),  a  few  participants  also  did  attribute 
changes in health and well-being to using such devices: 

“I like that [the Fitbit is] driving me to stay active enough that I’m 
consistently  losing  weight.  I  have  not  gained  anything,  and  I’ve 
lost  at  least  half  a  pound  every  week  since  I  started  doing  this. 
And that for me is pretty much almost a direct result of having the 
– it’s not really accountability, but it is.” (P3, 6 months)  

“I'm much more active now I never used to do the walking thing 
or - I even started running so, something that I'd never thought I'd 
ever  do...  I  added  that  because  I  started  becoming  more  active 
because of the Fitbit... I kind of built the confidence after - 'cause I 
had lost a significant amount of weight so I felt more confident to 
get into those types of activities.” (P25, 24 months) 

We  cannot  necessarily  assume  a  causal  relationship 
between  device  use  and  health  and  behavior  effects,  even 
though  the  participants  often  credited  the  devices  with 
motivating these changes. The fact that people were willing 
to  acquire  and  use  the  devices  suggests  that  some 
participants  may  already  have  been  motivated  to  make 
changes to their practices. What can be surmised, however, 
is that these devices and their associated services were able 
to influence and provide support for activity awareness and 
increased activity in general.  

Motivation and reflection 
Munson  draws  a  distinction  within  personal  informatics 
between technologies that are intended to be persuasive and 
technologies  that  are  intended  to  be  reflective  [15].  Either 
type  can  motivate  behavior  change,  though  the  former 
explicitly  promotes  certain  behaviors  through  its  design. 
The  commercial  technologies  have  been  designed  with 
some  features  geared  towards  persuasion  in  mind,  such  as 
the  inclusion  of  goals,  rewards  for  achievements,  and 
challenges  to  engage  the  wearer  in  specific  activities  and 
behaviors.  Motivation  and  reflection  were  both  clearly 
objectives in people’s decisions to acquire the devices: 

“I  got  [my  FuelBand]  precisely  to  motivate  me  to  be  a  bit  more 
active” (P15, 5 months) 

“In  my  case,  what  I  wanted  to  understand  really  was,  well,  how 
much I was actually walking per day. I had been in rehab since an 
auto accident... this was part of... trying to learn and get a better 
feel  for  just  how  much  I  was  generally  being  active  during  the 
day.” (P11, 11 months) 

that 

We  expected 
initial  motivational  effects  might 
eventually diminish in the longer term as the novelty of the 
devices  wore  off,  and  that  people  who  continued  to  use 
them  might  do  so  primarily  because  they  found  value  in 
their  reflective  benefits,  or  simply  in  having  the  data 
recorded. This change was noted by some participants: 

“I  pay  less  attention  to  it  now  than  I  did  when  I  first  got  it.  And 
maybe that’s because by now, I sort of know my patterns. I know 
that if I go to work and I walk from the train station and I have a 
normal day at work, and then I walk home from the train station, I 
know that I’m at about somewhere between like 8,000 and 9,000 
steps or something like that.” (P2, 3 months) 

However, it was interesting to find that even over months or 
years  of  use,  participants  still  experienced  what  they 
perceived to be motivating effects of the devices. 

“I really only had one period [of disuse] and I think it was because 
I knew I was being pretty sedentary at that time. I wasn’t feeling 
well  and  was  really  fatigued  and  maybe  I  just  didn’t  want  to  see 
the  numbers.  So  …  part  of  the  reason  I  continue  to  wear  it  is  it 
does  motivate  me  to  maintain  a  certain  activity  level.  (P27,  42 
months) 

“I go through between, let's say, 10,000 and 11,000 steps [daily], 
and I aim for 10 flights of stairs. So I know that if I'm gonna fall 
short of that... I do work a little harder. I'll run up and down the 
stairs  in  my  house  a  few  times.  So  it  just  motivates  me  to  reach 
that level. (P23, 12 months) 

Session: Activity RecognitionCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada491 
Accounting and getting credit 
The  numerical  feedback  provided  by  the  devices  was 
generally  motivating  for  participants,  manifested  in  their 
desire  to  meet  step  goals,  or  their  pride  in  achieving  high 
numbers. This appeared to be the case regardless of whether 
the numbers were concretely understandable, such as counts 
of  steps  or  flights  of  stairs,  or  abstracted  and  not  fully 
understood, such as the FuelBand’s fuel points: 

“[My  goal  is]  2,000  Fuel  points...  I  don't  really  know  what  that 
means,  but  that's  roughly  what  I  try  to  reach.  I  get  it  80,  90 
percent of the time.” (P12, 4 months) 

“I definitely find myself, ‘Oh I'm not going to go to bed until I hit 
my  3,000.’  I  stay  up  and  do  some  Xbox  sports  or  something  like 
that; just to do something until I can hit my goal… I've never seen 
[what  fuel  stands  for]  –  And  people  ask  that  a  lot.  They're  like, 
‘What  does  that  mean?’  I'm  like,  ‘Yeah  it's  some  weird  Nike 
proprietary  thing  that  takes  the  other  activity,  not  just  the  steps 
that you take.’ But no, I don't know what it means. So I'm working 
in ignorance on that point.” (P15, 5 months) 

Many  participants  expressed  a  strong  emphasis  on  the 
accounting  aspect  of  the  devices  in  a  way  that  suggested 
that  getting  system  credit  for  one’s  activities  was  an 
immediate objective that in some cases even overshadowed 
the underlying motivation to be fit or active: 

“I hate when we go out for the day and [I forget my Fitbit]; we’ll 
talk about how it’s wasted steps and it’s wasted stairs. And she’s 
like,  she  doesn’t  get  it,  ‘cause  she’s  like,  ‘It’s  not  wasted.  Your 
body  still  knows  that  you’re  moving.’  But  for  me,  if  it’s  not  on  I 
might as well just be sitting down.” (P3, 6 months) 

“It's like I'm missing all these opportunities [because I forgot my 
Fitbit  today].  So  I  have  to  rush  home.  I'm  supposed  to  meet 
someone at 5:00... I'm actually gonna go home and get my Fitbit 
and put it on [first].” (P18, 12 months) 

Participants  described  instances  in  which  they  forgot  their 
devices as “annoying” or “irritating” because they felt they 
were  not  getting  proper  credit  for  their  activities.  In  some 
cases, the fact that their activities were not being accounted 
for substantially affected their enjoyment of their activities, 
despite the fact that they were still getting exercise: 

“We  went  to  the  Space  Needle  and  we  were  walking  up  these 
stairs and then we were in Pike’s Place and we were doing those 
hills  and  it’s  just,  it  almost  puts  a  damper  on  my  day,  where  I’ll 
just say lots of times, ‘Damn it, I wish I had my Fitbit. Damn it, I 
wish  I  had  my  Fitbit.’  My  daughter  is  like,  ‘Who  cares?  We’re 
having  a  good  day’  and  I’m  like,  ‘I  don’t  have  my  Fitbit.’  You 
know, it’s like awful. And my nine-year-old is like, ‘Hello, it’s still 
fun.’ But I don’t feel rewarded for all the work I’m doing, which is 
kind  of  –  it’s  kind  of  a  negative  in  that  respect,  is  that  I  let  it 
impact my day too much if I forget it.” (P3, 6 months) 

Although  the  numerical  feedback  is  intended  to  provide  a 
representation of the wearer’s physical activity, participants 
did not treat it purely as such, and the discrepancy between 
overall  activity  and  what  the  systems  could  account  for 
often  had  an  influence  on  people’s  activities.  Some 
participants  described  favoring  activities  that  would  be 

accounted, and avoiding activities that they knew would not 
be accounted: 

“I've  noticed  it  doesn't  pick  up  when  I  go  backwards  on  my 
elliptical; it only picks up when I go forward, and then that makes 
me  not  want  to  go  backwards  at  all  on  the  elliptical.”  (P5,  18 
months) 

“Mine  doesn't  measure  staircases  which  would  be  nice,  and  I 
think for the only reason that it would probably get me to [take the 
stairs] … if I knew it was being measured … once you know that 
there's a device that's monitoring your steps and things, you're a 
little bit more conscious about actually using it and triggering it.” 
(P11, 11 months) 

This discrepancy between activity and representation often 
became greater in the long term as people’s fitness practices 
evolved.  Ironically,  devices  that  initially  helped  foster 
engagement  in  fitness  sometimes  became  too  naïve  to 
support  increasingly  sophisticated  fitness  priorities.  For 
example,  P21  found  that  her  Fitbit  better  served  her  needs 
early  in  her  use,  stating  that,  “It's  very  much  something 
that's very good for people who don't do any exercise to get 
them  moving.”  After  adding  new  activities  as  her  fitness 
increased,  however,  it  failed  to  measure  the  activities  that 
had become important to her: 

“I'm putting too much time getting up to 15,000 steps a day when 
I'd  be  better  off  going  to  the  gym  and  actually  working  out  with 
weights…  It's  all  focused  on  walking.  So  what  I  think  it's  really 
good  is  for  people  who  aren't  very  fit  to  get  them  moving,  but  I 
think actually it had a negative impact on somebody like me who's 
going  to  the  gym  doing  serious  weights  five  days  a  week.”  (P21, 
16 months) 

Goals and rewards 
Goals  and  rewards  within  the  context  of  technologies  to 
motivate  physical  activity  are  highly  complex  [8].  Our 
findings  illustrate  this  complexity  how  system  rewards 
become part of an ecosystem of rewards over use.  

The devices used by our participants all offered some form 
of explicit rewards or goals to be met, which we refer to as 
“system  rewards.”  For  example, 
the 
customizable goals, the Fitbit website incorporates a system 
of achievement badges, such as one for walking a “lifetime 
distance” of 500 miles (i.e., 500 miles since starting to use 
Fitbit), or for climbing 200 flights of stairs on a single day.  

in  addition 

to 

Eighteen participants explicitly stated that system goals and 
rewards  influenced  on  their  personal  activity  and  fitness 
goals.  Goals  could  provide  a benchmark  that  allowed 
people  to  contextualize  their  own  activity  or  they  could 
serve as a target level of activity, and most said they did not 
edit the systems’ default goals: 

“I've just left [the system goal set] at 10,000 because it seems kind 
of  reasonable  like  your  worst  case  scenario  is  you're  just  under 
10,000  and  you  should  go  do  something,  so  I  thought  10,000 
worked pretty well.” (P18, 12 months) 

“The 10,000 steps is just a rule of thumb I've been using 'cause I 
read somewhere if you do 10,000 steps you can maintain a pretty -
-  I  don't  even  remember  where  I  read  it….  I  don't  know,  but  it 

Session: Activity RecognitionCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada492 
sounded reasonable to me so… I haven't changed that in the time 
I've been using it.” (P14, 16 months) 

System-based  rewards  also  exerted  a  strong  influence  on 
people’s  personal  goals,  often  to  such  an  extent  that  the 
system  goals  seemed  to  supplant  underlying  goals  of 
improved  health  or  increased  fitness.  In  particular  we 
uncovered  a  game-like  phenomenon  which  we  termed 
“number fishing,” in which participants reportedly engaged 
in activities explicitly for the system rewards: 

“There  was  one  time  that  I  came  home,  and  it  had  been  a 
particularly  active  day,  and  I  think  I  was  at  like  33,000  steps  or 
something  like  that,  and  I  was  just  like,  ‘I’m  just  going  to  walk 
around  the  house  until  I  get  35.’  So  I  did  that.  I  just  literally 
walked in circles around the house picking up things and moving 
things around.” (P2, 3 months) 

“I  think  the  badges  are  a  great  way  to  get,  you  know,  ‘cause 
you’re – if I did like 60 flights of stairs and I know at 75 I’m going 
to  get  something  for  it,  you  know,  do  the  extra  steps,  which  is 
completely ridiculous, but it works.” (P4, 10 months) 

the  system.  This  acknowledgement 

The  quote  from  P4  above  indicates  a  perspective  that 
rewards  such  as  badges  are  a  somewhat  trivial,  albeit 
effective,  manifestation  of  the  fundamental  health-oriented 
benefits  of 
that 
achieving  numbers  or  badges  was  an  artificial  goal  was 
common among our participants, even though nearly all of 
them  indicated  that  they  perceived  the  system  goals  or 
rewards as valuable. In many cases, system rewards such as 
badges  and  numerical  goals  were  desirable  enough  that 
people  wanted  them  even  when  they  knew  they  were  not 
accurate  representations  of  what  they  had  accomplished, 
such as in the case of false positives or system gaming. One 
participant  described  an  incident  in  which  he  discovered 
that construction in his building was registering as steps on 
his Fitbit, and how the resulting incorrectly high step count 
and potential to achieve a reward still served as motivation: 

“I left my Fitbit at home, and I got this email [at work] ... saying, 
‘Congratulations,  you  just  got  a  30,000  step  badge!’  I'm  like,  ‘I 
left it at home. What happened?’ And I went home, and it was at 
like  32,000  because  of  this  nailing  into  the  wall.  Now  I  will  tell 
you that that caused me to go put it in my pocket and then go walk 
out and do 3,000 more steps so I would get the 35,000 badge, so I 
admit to that, okay?” (P11, 11 months) 

Over  time,  participants  also  developed  “reward  ecologies” 
for  themselves  that  went  beyond  the  explicit  system  goals 
and  rewards  by  incorporating  real-world  rewards  or  other 
tools.  For  example,  one  participant  used  her  Fitbit  in 
conjunction with an app for tracking and managing calorie 
intake information to give herself rewards that were entirely 
external to the system: 

“I like using my Fitbit ‘cause I want to walk a lot and do the stairs 
so that when I get home I can have a snack. Like it kind of drives 
my getting a snack in the evening, and if I don’t walk enough and I 
don’t  earn  enough  extra  calories  I  don’t  get  a  snack  in  the 
evening” (P5, 6 months) 

Participants also found other ways to convert their activities 
into external rewards. For example, P1 used a Striiv feature 

that  allowed  her  to  make  donations  to  charities  based  on 
meeting  fitness  challenges.  Another  participant  used  a 
service called EarnedIt to amplify her rewards: 

“[EarnedIt]  will  take  all  your  Fitbit  activity  and  give  you  prizes 
from  it...  it  will  look  at  how  much  activity  came  from  like  mild 
activity  versus  rigorous  activity  and  it  will  give  you  points,  and 
then you can use those points to buy stuff. So you get free stuff. It's 
pretty cool.” (P6) 

Sharing of data and social effects 
Activity  monitoring  technologies  often  support  various 
ways of sharing data and viewing  others’ shared data. The 
study of widely adopted commercial technologies allows us 
to examine how these practices play out among organically 
occurring social networks in which people opt in or out of 
sharing based on their needs or motivations. 

Not  all  participants  made  use  of  the  social  features  of  the 
system or shared their data. Some simply lacked interest in 
sharing  data  with  others,  and  a  few  participants  expressed 
concerns the personal nature of their data, although this was 
not  common.  There  were  two  general  concerns  about 
privacy,  the  first  about  having  personal  data  uploaded  to  a 
server,  and  the  second  that  health  data,  and  in  particular 
weight, would be visible to others: 

“For  me  it’s  very  much  about  losing  weight,  and  that  for  me  is 
very  personal.  So  I  don’t  post  a  lot  of  things  or  share  a  lot  of 
things.” (P3, 6 months) 

the  15  participants  who  explicitly 
However,  among 
mentioned  using  social  features  of  the  systems,  the 
motivating  effects  often  proved  to  be  highly  durable, 
offering another set of potential goals: 

“I  think  the  key  motivation  was  to  lose  weight  in  the  beginning. 
Now, as we move on, I think the greater motivation is competition 
with  friends  in  terms  of  how  many  steps  or  how  many  active 
minutes in the FitBit world, that kind of thing.” (P19, 4.5 years) 

“When  I'm  on  the  website  and  I  see  who's  stacking  where,  if  I'm 
close to one of them… I'll make an extra push to take it a little bit 
further every day so that I can try to get my average up and beat 
them.” (P17, 6 months) 

One  issue  that  arose  in  the  long-term  use  of  these  devices 
and their associated social features was that of finding the 
right community to motivate oneself or otherwise enhance 
the  experience.  Previous  systems  have  proposed  on 
leveraging a person’s existing social network for motivation 
[6,  23]  Among  our  participants,  however,  it  was  rare  that 
sharing  data  with  a  person’s  real-life  friends  and  family 
proved 
time.  Some 
participants  had  one  or  a  few  friends  with  whom  they 
regularly shared data but this was generally only motivating 
when  the  friends  had  similar  patterns  of  activity.  It  was 
more  common  that  people  described  the  attrition  of  their 
friends  or  colleagues  over  time,  or  ways  in  which  they 
failed to motivate as a community: 

to  be  highly  motivating  over 

“Most of [my co-workers] got [a Fuelband]. And now it's only a 
select few that still use it on a day to day basis.” (P20, 8 months) 

Session: Activity RecognitionCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada493 
“Firstly, I don't know anyone [who has a Fitbit]. I mean, [my son 
and daughter-in-law], they're the only two I know who have them, 
and  their  numbers  are  like  off  the  charts.  So  you  know,  so  I 
wouldn't  want  to  compare  my  numbers  with  them.”  (P23,  12 
months) 

People  who  made  extensive  use  of  social  and  sharing 
features of the system to compare data were more likely to 
do  so  with  people  they  had  met  through  the  online 
communities.  Interactions  with  friends  made  through  the 
online  social  networks  often  proved  more  motivating  or 
engaging  because  participants  perceived  them  as  better 
“peers” for comparing activity data, a finding that relates to 
Peng and Hsieh’s studies of online gaming friends [18]: 

“I  have  a  few  [real  world]  friends  that  have  them  and  we  don't 
compete  much  because  I'm  generally  in  the  very  high  step 
category  and  they're  more  in  the  reasonable  step  categories,  but 
the  FitBit  website  has  a  community  that  has  all  kinds  of  groups 
that show leader boards. So it's competition among FitBit friends 
from all over the world that I will never meet in real life.” (P19, 
4.5 years) 

“You  know,  there’s  some  of  ‘em  [Fitbit  friends]  that  I’ve  never 
ever talked to, and then there’s a few that we’ve talked a little bit 
[online]… But, you know, having even the ones we’ve never talked 
on there… it’s like seeing somebody at the gym working out. And 
they’re  over  there  working  hard.  So,  just  seeing  that,  you  know, 
‘Hey, if they can do it, and maybe I can do it a little bit better.’” 
(P28, 8 months) 

Even though the online communities allowed people to find 
peers  with  whom  to  share  data,  finding  the  “right” 
community could still prove challenging: 

“It's  hard  to  figure  out  who  to  compare  against,  or  who  to  be  a 
right  set  with.  I  mean,  there's  some  sort  of  ridiculous  people  on 
there, and they're like they're walking … 50,000 steps by the time 
they  get  to  work…  And  then  there's  people  who  are  …  trying  to 
lose 50 pounds or more, which is pretty dramatic as well… So, I 
don't know how it can filter better so that you can find your peer 
group in a more meaningful way.” (P26, 3.5 years) 

Although  real-life  friends  and  family  were  often  less 
motivating  than  online  contacts  in  terms  of  comparing  or 
competing,  connecting  with  them  through  the  systems’ 
social  networking  features  proved  to  be  valuable  in  other 
ways.  Participants  described  making  use  of  shared  data  to 
provide support or maintain awareness, much as they might 
with general purpose social networking sites. For example, 
one  participant  talked  about  the  awareness  and  peace  of 
mind he gained from sharing data with his elderly mother: 

“It's  actually  kind  of  cool  having  my  mom  on  it,  right,  because 
she's  up  in  her  late  seventies  now.  I  kind  of  worry  about  that.” 
(P10, 11 months) 

P10 described calling to check on his mother when he saw 
that she had not uploaded data, and discovering that she had 
hurt  her  knee.  They  subsequently  used  her  data  to  make 
sure she did not go over 5,000 steps per day while healing. 

P18  talked  about  being  able  to  use  other  people’s  data  to 
know when to offer encouragement and support: 

“[My sister]'s just finally now getting back to walking after a year 
of  surgery  and  everything,  and  when  I  see  she's  down  at  3,000 
steps I'll send her an email and say, "C'mon, you need to get out 
there. Go take a walk." (P18, 12 months) 

DISCUSSION 
Our  findings  contribute  new  knowledge  about  the  use  of 
wearable  activity  sensing  technologies  and  evolution  of 
practices  surrounding  them  among  long-term  users  in 
naturalistic contexts. In this section, we further contribute a 
set of considerations for the design of such technologies for 
long-term  support,  and  situate  our  conclusions  within  the 
landscape of previous findings. 

Designing for long-term support 
As  persuasive  technologies  become  increasingly  common 
some key questions remain: What constitutes the success of 
a  persuasive  technology?  Does  a  successful  persuasive 
technology  continue  to  offer  value  by  supporting  and 
scaffolding  the  behavior  over  time?  Or  does  it  serve  as  a 
‘gateway’  technology  [21],  training  and  routinizing  new 
practices to the point that the technology itself is no longer 
necessary?  We  believe  that  both  approaches  have  merit  as 
design  goals.  Technologies  can  be  intentionally  designed 
such  that  their  success  obviates  them,  or  designed  to 
provide  continued  support  and  persuasion.  Although  many 
people who use wearable activity monitors eventually stop 
using them, our findings suggest that some segment of the 
population  continue  to  derive  value  and  motivation  from 
them  even  after  many  months  or  years  of  use.  Participants 
reported  achieving  goals  such  as  weight  loss  or  increased 
fitness,  and  talked  about  changes  to  their  routine  and 
activity  levels  that  they  believed  were  long  term  and 
durable,  but  still  relied  upon  recording  and  viewing  their 
activity data, and sharing data with social networks. These 
findings  yield  several  implications  for  the  design  of 
persuasive  technologies  intended  to  provide  long-term 
support in addition to prompting behavior change: 

Motivating  maintenance  as  well  as  change:  Persuasive 
technologies  often  focus  on  prompts  or  cues  to  introduce 
changes  or  improvements  in  behavior.  Although  these 
aspects have proven to be valuable, tools should also offer 
explicit  motivation  for  the  maintenance  of  practices  or 
achievements,  as  maintenance 
is  critical  for  durable 
behavior  change  [20].  As  our  findings  indicate,  long-term 
users of wearable sensing technologies often rely upon their 
devices to motivate a consistent level of activity or provide 
awareness of a baseline, although the system’s rewards for 
doing so are less explicit. Participants found the continued 
awareness of their data valuable and motivating. However, 
it is worthwhile to consider how designs can provide more 
explicit  support  for  behavior  maintenance.  For  example,  a 
system  might  reward  the  wearer  not  only  on  how  many 
steps  she  has  achieved  in  a  given  day,  but  also  on  how 
many days in a row she has managed to reach that goal. 

the 

Supporting 
evolution  of 
appropriate  social  networks:  Among  long-term  users, 
engagement with social networks often provided a source of 

identification  and 

Session: Activity RecognitionCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada494 
motivation and kept interaction dynamic. However, finding 
the  right  people  or  communities  with  whom  to  share  data 
often  proved  a  challenge.  Relying  on  real-life  friends  and 
family alone may be too naïve an approach when people’s 
goals  are  as  individual  and  dynamic  as  those  of  our 
participants.  Existing  systems  support  the  formation  of 
groups  with  specific  interests,  attributes  or  goals,  which 
offers  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  Future  designs  should 
consider  adding  more  support  for  finding  relevant  and 
motivating  communities,  and  for  transitioning  between 
communities  or  dynamically  evolving  communities  as 
people’s needs and practices change. For example, a system 
might analyze the activity of a person and find and suggest 
groups that have proven to be motivating (i.e., have resulted 
in improved fitness) for people with similar patterns.  

Supporting changes in activity and metrics: The type of 
tracking and measurement provided by the tools influenced 
how  people  thought  about  their  activity,  apparent  in  their 
fluent  translation  of  activity  to  metrics  such  as  steps  or 
points. Even so, people’s practices sometimes veered away 
from  system  metrics  as  they  became  more  engaged  in 
fitness. Metrics and data that had been valuable early in use 
could become insufficient over time; activities that became 
important  to  people  as  their  practices  changed,  such  as 
weightlifting  and  yoga,  were  no  longer  reflected  by  the 
system’s  metrics.  This  resulted  in  a  mismatch  between  the 
wearer’s  priorities  and  the  system’s  support.  Designers  of 
systems  should  consider  ways  in  which  measurements  and 
tracked  activities  can  be  augmented  or  evolved  over  time, 
or  ways  in  which  different  sensing  technologies  can  be 
integrated  into  the  overall  ecosystem  of  support  tools.  For 
example,  systems  might  be  designed  to  collect  and  track 
more general data, such as steps, early in use. Subsequently 
they  might  adapt  to  track  more  specific  types  of  activities, 
perhaps  even  integrating  dynamically  with  sensors  in  the 
environment or technology-augmented fitness equipment. 

Supporting  the  evolution  of  rewards:  The  commercial 
technologies used by our participants all included a built-in 
system of rewards. It was, however, interesting to see how 
these system rewards fit into a larger ecosystem of rewards 
that  people  created  for  themselves,  including  “real  world” 
rewards.  Although  system  rewards  support  reflection  and 
offer  motivation  particularly  early  in  usage,  providing  a 
variety of rewards and changing rewards over time seem to 
be valuable in motivation. It may be worthwhile to consider 
a  greater  scope  of  reward  types,  and  ways  of  adding 
concrete ‘real world’ rewards in addition to system-specific 
including  dynamic  or  evolving 
symbolic 
approaches 
.  For 
example, a system might allow a person to specify a desired 
future  gift  to  himself,  and  then  integrate  with  personal 
budgeting  software  that  would  allow  for  savings  to  be  put 
aside towards the gift based on the person’s fitness activity.  

to maintain  engagement

to  rewards 

rewards, 

Comparisons with previous research findings 
Our  findings  build  upon  and  extend  previous  work, 
supporting  and  contrasting  with  findings  of  experimental 

long-term  behavioral  changes  as 

deployments of health and fitness sensing technologies. The 
general  value  that  people  attributed  to  these  devices 
the  most  fundamental  findings  of  several 
confirmed 
previous deployments, such as those of Fish ‘n’ Steps [12], 
UbiFit  [7],  and  Chick  Clique  [23],  as  well  as  research  by 
Fogg  [10],  about  how  providing  data  about  people’s 
physical  activity  raises  consciousness  of  increases  activity 
at least in the short term. Most of these studies do not make 
claims  about 
trials 
generally  lasted  from  a  few  days  to  a  few  months.  Their 
findings  held  true  for  our  participants,  and  many  of them 
also attributed what they believed to be long-term behavior 
changes to the devices. This should not be taken, however, 
as  an  indicator  of  their  potential  for  prompting  such 
changes for the general population as we did not study use 
by  people  for  whom  the  technology  failed  to  motivate 
activity. Additionally, some of the shorter durations of use 
represented  in  our  study  (as  few  as  3  months)  may  be  too 
short to inspect for real behavior change [20].  

findings  which 

Our  study  also  revealed  participants’  extreme  focus  on 
numerical  goals  and  numerical  data.  These  findings  echo 
Li’s  claim  that  people  focus  on  numbers  rather  than  the 
activities the numbers represent [12], as well as Albaina et 
that  numbers  were 
indicated 
al.’s 
motivating.  Our  findings  regarding  the  importance  of 
numbers,  accounting,  and  accuracy  lend  credence  to 
Consolvo et al.’s design requirement that appropriate credit 
for  activities  is  essential  for  encouraging  physical  activity 
[6].  Our  work  extends  this  knowledge  by  illustrating  how 
important and embedded these  representations can become 
in daily practice, even after very long use. 

Although our findings regarding the practices of long-term 
wearers  generally  confirmed  those  found  in  previous 
shorter-term  studies,  some  of  our  findings  contrasted  with 
them,  for  example  in  how  wearers  responded  to  system 
goals  and  rewards.  Consolvo  et  al.  conducted  a  survey 
asking  people  what  kinds  of  fitness  goal-setting  strategies 
they  would  want  to  use,  and  determined  that  self-set  goals 
or goals chosen with the help of the user were viewed more 
positively  than  those  determined  entirely  by  others  [8]. 
Although  we  did  see  some  customization  of  system  goals, 
our  participants  overwhelmingly  left  the  default  goals 
unchanged,  and  many  used  them  as personal  daily  targets. 
This contrast may be due to the fact that the proposed goals 
in  the  survey  were  formulated  in  terms  of  workout 
activities, whereas the system goals offered by  the devices 
in  our  study  are  achievements  expressed  in  terms  of  data 
collected by the system and therefore seem a natural fit. 

to  be  motivating  and  satisfying 

The  system  rewards,  such  as  achievement  badges,  also 
proved 
for  many 
participants.  In  contrast,  Munson  et  al.’s  evaluation  of  an 
activity  tracking  system  that  incorporated  rewards  and 
journaling found that the rewards were not deemed valuable 
and  did  not  affect  activity  [16].  Again,  however,  our 
findings  need  to  be  considered  in  light  of  the  fact  that  we 
were  learning  largely  from  the  experiences  of  people  who 

Session: Activity RecognitionCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada495 
had  adopted  and  continued  to  use  these  devices,  and  their 
attitudes towards these rewards may not generalize. 

Regarding  the  social  features  of  these  technologies,  our 
study  uncovered  varied  practices  and  benefits.  Previous 
experimental  deployments  have  also  touched  upon  aspects 
of  data  sharing,  such  as  with  whom  people  would  want  to 
share  data  [15],  and  the  social  interaction  that  arises  from 
sharing among friends [6]. In our examination of long-term 
users  of  these  technologies,  we  found  evidence  that  early 
practices of sharing data with friends and family are likely 
to  change  over  time,  and  that  people  go  through  a  process 
of  identifying  relevant  people  with  whom  to  share  data. 
People’s  evolving  goals  and  practices  further  complicate 
this  challenge.  From  a  motivational  standpoint,  finding 
peers with similar activities or goals, whether in one’s real 
world  or  online  social  network,  is  more  valuable  than 
simply  having  a  personal  connection.  We  believe  that 
aspects  of  social  use  can  be  more  fully  addressed  going 
forward  by  looking  at  how  practices  emerge  within 
populations  of  in-the-wild  adopters  and  their  naturally 
evolving social networks. 

CONCLUSION 
The  recent  widespread  use  of  commercial  technologies  for 
activity  sensing  and  monitoring  provides  a  valuable 
opportunity  to  gain  insight  into  the  naturalistic  use  and 
effects of these ubiquitous computing systems. In this work, 
we examine the impact and influence of tracking devices on 
long  term  wearers’  activities  and  attitudes.  Our  findings 
reveal that despite changing goals and practices over time, 
some  population  of  wearers  continue  to  derive  value  and 
motivation  from  the  technologies.  This  suggests  that  it  is 
worthwhile  for  designers  of  personal  informatics  and 
persuasive  technologies  to  consider  how  to  provide  long 
term  support  for  healthy  behaviors,  in  addition  to  offering 
initial  motivation  for  change.  We  believe  that  long-term 
wearers  have  needs  and  practices  that  are  different  from 
those in the initial weeks of use. By looking at the changing 
use  of  metrics,  data  sharing,  and  rewards,  we  provide 
grounded insights about how systems can evolve alongside 
wearers and provide continued benefits. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  thank  the  study  participants  and  the  CHI  reviewers. 
This work was partially funded by the Natural Sciences and 
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). 

REFERENCES 
1.  Ahtinen A., Mattila, E., Väätänen, A., Hynninen, L., Salminen, J., 
Koskinen, E., Laine, K. User experiences of mobile wellness 
applications in health promotion. Proc. PervasiveHealth’09. 
2.  Albaina, I., Visser, T., van der Mast, C., Vastenburg, M. Flowie. 

A persuasive virtual coach to motivate elderly individuals to walk. 
Proc. PervasiveHealth’09. 

3.  Barua, D., Kay, J. and Paris, C. Viewing and controlling personal 

sensor data: what do users want? In PERSUASIVE 2013. 
4.  Bickmore, T., Caruso, L., Clough-Gorr, K. Acceptance and 

usability of a relational agent interface by urban older adults. Ext. 
Abstracts CHI’05. 

5.  Bravata, D., Smith-Spangler, C., Sundaram, V., Gienger, A., Lin, 
N., Lewis, R., Stave, C., Olkin, I., Sirard, J. Using pedometers to 
increase physical activity and improve health. JAMA 2007, 298 
(19). 

6.  Consolvo, S., Everitt, K., Smith, I., Landay, J. Design 

requirements for technologies that encourage physical activity. 
Proc. CHI’06. 

7.  Consolvo, S., Klasnja, P., McDonald, D., Avrahami, D., 

Froehlich, J., LeGrand, L., Libby, R., Mosher, K., Landay, J. 
Flowers or a robot army? Encouraging awareness & activity with 
personal, mobile displays. Proc. UbiComp’08. 

8.  Consolvo, S., Klasnja, P., McDonald, D., Landay, J. Goal 

considerations for persuasive technologies that encourage physical 
activity. Proc. Persuasive 2009. 

9.  Consolvo, S., McDonald, D., Toscos, T., Chen, M., Froehlich, J., 
Harrison, B., Klasnja, P., LaMarca, A., LeGrand, L., Libby, R., 
Smith, I., Landay, J. Activity sensing in the wild: a field trial of 
UbiFit garden. Proc. CHI’08. 

10. Fogg, B. Persuasive Technology: Using computers to change what 

we think and do. Morgan Kaufmann, 2003 

11. Klasnja, P., Consolvo, S., Pratt, W. How to evaluate technologies 

for health behavior change in HCI research. Proc. CHI’11. 

12. Li, I. Beyond counting steps: using context to improving 
monitoring of physical activity. Proc. UbiComp’09. 

13. Lin, J., Mamykina, L., Lindtner, S., Delajoux, G., Strub, H. B. 
Fish’n’Steps: encouraging physical activity with an interactive 
computer game. Proc. UbiComp’06. 

14. Michie, S., Ashford, S., Sniehotta, F. F., Dombrowski, S. U., 
Bishop, A., French, D. P. A refined taxonomy of behaviour 
change techniques to help people change their physical activity 
and healthy eating behaviours: The CALO-RE taxonomy. 
Psychology & Health, 26(11).. 

15. Munson, S. Mindfulness, reflection, and persuasion in personal 

informatics. Ext. Abstract CHI’12. 

16. Munson, S., Consolvo, S. Exploring goal-setting, rewards, self-
monitoring, and sharing to motivate physical activity. Proc. 
PervasiveHealth’12. 

17. Newman, M.W., Lauterbach, D., Munson, S., Resnick, P. and 
Morris, M.E. It’s not that I don’t have problems, I’m just not 
putting them on Facebook: Challenges and opportunities in using 
online social networks for health. CSCW 2011. 

18. Peng, W., Hsieh, G. The influence of competition, cooperation, 

and player relationship in a motor performance centered computer 
game. In Computers in Human Behavior 28(12). 

19. Prasad, A., Sorber, J., Stablein, T., Anthony, D., Kotz, D. 

Understanding sharing preferences and behavior for mHealth 
devices. Proc. WPES’12.  

20. Prochaska, J., Johnson, S., and Lee, P. The transtheoretical model 
of behavior change. In S.A. Shumaker, E.B. Schron, J.K. Ockene 
and W.L. McBee, eds. The handbook of health behavior change. 
1998. 

21. Schwanda, V., Ibara, S., Reynolds, S., Cosley, D. Side Effects and 
‘Gateway’ Tools: Advocating a Broader Look at Evaluating 
Persuasive Systems. Proc. CHI’11. 

22. Tollmar, K., Bentley, F., Viedma, C. Mobile health mashups. 

Proc. PervasiveHealth’12. 

23. Toscos, T., Faber, A., An, S., Gandhi, M. Chick Clique: 

persuasive technology to motivate teenage girls to exercise. Ext. 
Abstracts CHI’06. 

24. Tudor-Locke, C. Taking steps toward increased physical activity: 
using pedometers to measure and motivate. President’s Council 
on Physical Fitness and Sports: Research Digest, Series 3, No. 17, 
June 2002. 

Session: Activity RecognitionCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada496 
 
 
