UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

Personalization Revisited: A Reflective Approach Helps 
People Better Personalize Health Services and Motivates 
Them To Increase Physical Activity 
Min Kyung Lee1, Junsung Kim2, Jodi Forlizzi1, Sara Kiesler1 

1HCI Institute, Carnegie Mellon University 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
{mklee, forlizzi, kiesler}@cs.cmu.edu  

2Ottomatika Inc. 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
junsung@ottomatika.com 

ABSTRACT 
Current  approaches  to  personalization  either  presuppose 
people’s needs and automatically tailor services or provide 
formulaic  options  for  people  to  customize.  We  propose  a 
complementary  approach  to  personalization:  a  reflective 
strategy that helps people realize what matters to them and 
enables  them  to  better  personalize  services  themselves.  To 
design  this  strategy,  we  first  studied  the  practices  of  eight 
personal  health  service  providers.  We  then  tested  the 
strategy’s  efficacy  by  building  a  Fitbit  Plan  website  that 
encouraged  Fitbit  users  to  customize  a  plan  or  accept  an 
automatically  tailored  plan.  For  one  group  of  users,  the 
website used the reflective strategy to assist in the plan set-
up process. A two-week between-subjects field experiment 
showed that the reflective strategy helped motivate users to 
carry out their plans, increasing their average daily steps by 
2,425 steps. Without the reflective strategy, users either set 
easy  goals  or  failed  to  carry  out  system-created  plans, 
ultimately  showing  no  change  in  their  average  daily  steps. 
This  work  suggests  that  helping  people  reflect  on  and 
connect with their own goals in using a personalized service 
could advance the effectiveness of the service.  

Author Keywords 
Reflective personalization; service; behavior change; 
health; fitness; personal informatics; activity tracker 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 

INTRODUCTION 
Personalization has become an integral part of technology-
based  services,  with  an  ever-growing  influence  on  the 
decisions  that  people  make  and  the  content  and  services 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission 
from
permissions@acm.org. 
UbiComp '15, September 7–11, 2015, Osaka, Japan. 
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to
ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-3574-4/15/09…$15.00. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2807552 

fee.  Request  permissions 

and/or 

a 

feeds 

access.  Social  media 

they 
on  Facebook, 
advertisements  on  Amazon,  search  results  on  Google, 
physical  activity  goals  on  the  Apple  Watch,  and  even 
interactions at Disney parks are automatically personalized 
based  on  people’s  behavior  traces,  including  browsing, 
purchasing,  and  communication  records  physical  activity 
levels,  and  locations  [2,  6,  13,  40,  62].  In  addition  to  this 
system-driven  personalization,  many  technologies  allow 
people  to  directly customize  service  features  [5,  47]  or  the 
user models on which personalization is based [63], making 
the  personalization  process  user-driven.  Prior  research  has 
shown that personalization in general offers many benefits: 
reduced  cognitive  and  physical  overloads,  faster  task 
completion,  and  increased  persuasion,  satisfaction,  and 
loyalty to services [4, 5, 19, 26, 27, 30, 34, 59]. However, 
we argue that personalization can be further improved.  

In  system-driven  personalization,  systems  infer  what  users 
want  and  need  based  on  the  assumption  that  their  user 
models  accurately  represent  real  users.  However,  this 
assumption  is  often  false  as  the  models  are  based  on 
specific,  limited  instances  and  treat  users  as  objects  of 
algorithmic  optimization  [32,  40].  The  limitations  of  the 
user  models  can  result  in  irrelevant  or  even  offensive 
personalization  outcomes  [11].  The  automatic–and  thus 
often 
system-driven 
personalization  exacerbates 
the  problem.  The  hidden 
assumptions  of  user  models  may  unconsciously  bias 
decision-making [55], habituate people to follow directions 
mindlessly [7, 48], or make them focus only on things they 
already like [44, 58].  

imperceptible–implementation  of 

User-driven  personalization  (also  known  as  customization) 
offers  alternatives  for  people  to  choose  from  and  tailor. 
However,  the  choices  are  often  formulaic  and  superficial; 
previous  research  reveals  many  reasons  why  people  may 
not  be  able  to  customize  or  tailor  options  to  best  satisfy 
their needs [46, 53]. People may feel overwhelmed or even 
experience  decreased  satisfaction  when  presented  with  too 
many choices [23]. 

We  propose  an  alternative  approach  to  personalization, 
services 
which  helps  people 
themselves.  Rather  than  assuming  what  will  work  best  for 
people  or  presenting  them  with  options  from  which  to 
choose,  our  approach  prompts  people  to  reflect  on  their 

to  better  personalize 

743

 
 
goals and priorities, so that they can focus on what is most 
important to them when using and modifying services. We 
envision  personalization  as  a  form  of  empowerment, 
helping  people  realize  what  outcomes  matter  to  them  and 
giving them the agency to prioritize those outcomes. 

In  this  paper,  we  designed  a  reflective  personalization 
approach  informed  by  interviews  with  personal  service 
providers. We tested the efficacy of the reflective approach 
using Fitbit [14], a fitness service that tracks steps. Among 
many  services  that  could  benefit  from  the  reflective 
approach,  we  focused  on  goal  setting  as  it  is  a  ubiquitous 
feature  in  technology  services  with  a  cascading  effect  in 
later  service  use.  We  chose  a  personal  health  service 
because health is one of the domains where personalization 
is increasingly seen as a transformative factor.  

We built Fitbit Plan, a website that let Fitbit users set step 
goals  and  track  their  progress.  Fitbit  Plan  allowed  users  to 
either  create  their  own  goals  or  follow  suggested  plans 
based  on  their  performance  over  the  previous  two  weeks. 
The  reflective  strategy  was  used  during  the  set-up  process 
to  encourage  some  users  to  think  deeply  about  why  they 
wanted  to  increase  their  daily  steps.  We  conducted  a  2 
(Reflective vs. Non-reflective strategy) x 2 (User-driven vs. 
System-driven  personalization)  field  experiment  for  two 
weeks  to  test  the  reflective  strategy.  The  results  show  that 
adding  the  reflective  strategy  motivated  users  to  increase 
their daily steps by 2,425 steps on average over two weeks. 
Without the reflective strategy, users either set easy goals or 
failed  to  carry  out  the  plans  that  the  system  suggested, 
ultimately showing no change in their average daily steps. 

This  paper  makes  two  contributions.  First,  we  introduce  a 
new  approach  to  personalization  that  broadens  the  design 
space. Second, we demonstrate the efficacy of this approach 
in  a  field  study  and  discuss  design  implications  for  both 
reflective  service  personalization  and  future  research  on 
personalization and behavior change in HCI.  

learning 

REFLECTIVE APPROACHES IN HCI 
There is a long history of HCI research on how more active 
user participation and reflection play out in such domains as 
office  technology  design  [10],  end-user  programming  and 
development 
[42], 
[15],  computer-supported 
reflective  design  [3,  51],  slow  technology  [18],  online 
discussion  participation  [28],  sustainability  [60],  and 
personal health [21, 38, 49]. Collectively, this work reveals 
the  benefits  of  empowering  users  by  giving  them  the 
freedom  to  interpret  technologies  and  to  appropriate  them 
for their own use. Yet, this line of work has not influenced 
and 
how  personalization  has  been 
implemented  in  the  fields  of  HCI,  business,  or  computer 
science.  Drawing  from  this  body  of  work,  we  explore  a 
reflective  approach  to  personalization,  in  which  users  are 
given  opportunities  to  think  about  what  matters  to  them 
with  the  guidance  of  technology-based  services.  When 
given  this  agency,  people  may  be  better  able  to  create 
personalized services that work best for them.  

conceptualized 

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

EXPLORING  THE  PERSONALIZATION  STRATEGIES  
OF HUMAN SERVICE PROVIDERS 
To  create  our  model  for  personalization  technology,  we 
studied  personal  service  providers.  Services  were  being 
personalized long before computers were invented. Service 
roles  such  as  aide-de-camp,  court  jester,  tutor,  and  butler 
existed  centuries  ago  for  high-status  and  wealthy  people. 
Today,  personal  service  providers  perform  a  myriad  of 
personalized  services  at  many  levels  of  society.  In  this 
paper,  we  ask  how  personal  service  providers  have 
navigated  the  problems  of  determining  and  adapting  to 
people’s preferences. Prior work suggests that practitioners 
use  principled  approaches  to  understand  unique  problem 
situations and optimize solutions for each problem [50]. 

Method 
We  interviewed  eight  personal  service  providers  (five 
women)  who  offered  expert  services  to  improve  clients’ 
physical and mental wellbeing in an Eastern city in the U.S. 
The providers included two personal trainers, two physical 
therapists,  a  chiropractor,  a  counselor,  a  massage  therapist 
and a personal tutor. They had worked in their occupations 
for 15.6 years on average. We recruited them using referrals 
from  clients  and  snowball  sampling.  We  also  directly 
contacted professionals whose business contact information 
was publicly available. We aimed to recruit providers with 
experience,  as  experts  are  reported  to  provide  better  care 
than novices [24].  

Interview protocol 
The  hour-long  interview  began  with  questions  about  the 
professionals’  work  contexts  and  services,  their  typical 
relationships  with  clients,  and  whether  any  of  their  work 
was  tailored  to  different  individuals.  Further  questions 
probed  what  information  the  professionals  needed  to  do  a 
good  job  with  their  clients,  how  they  listened  to  feedback 
and  observed  cues  in  their  clients’  behavior,  and  how  they 
handled breakdowns in interactions with their clients. 

into 

instances 

Analysis 
The interview recordings were transcribed for analysis. We 
grouped  personalization 
three  coding 
categories,  based  on  how  service  providers  collected 
information  about  a  client,  tailored  services  to  the  client, 
and  evaluated  their  services  and  used  client  feedback  [13]. 
We  also  added  codes  that  described  details  of  how 
providers  personalized  their  services  and  the  reasons  they 
gave  for  doing  so  [56].  We  re-grouped  lower-level  codes 
into clusters that reflected themes of personalization across 
the  three  stages,  and  used  the  themes  to  consider  current 
practices of technology–based personalization. 

Results 
Two  key  results  informed  the  design  of  our  reflective 
strategy. 

Providers act as catalysts for reflective service processes 
When  clients  lacked  knowledge  and  expertise  about  a 
service  domain,  service  providers  played  active  roles  in 
personalizing the service. The clients provided information 

744

SESSION: PERSUASIVE AND PERSONAL

about their goals and motivations, but it was the provider’s 
role to devise a program with specific tasks. For example, a 
physical therapist created a simple storefront mockup for a 
client  who  wanted  to  return  to  her  cashier  job  in  a  bakery 
after  her  injury.  Together,  they  practiced  sales  interactions 
and  monitored  the  client’s  progress  in  managing  the 
demands  of  the  job.  After  the  therapist  understood  the 
client’s  goals,  the  client’s  initial  preferences  regarding  the 
service  played  a  comparatively 
in 
determining the ultimate nature of the service. 

insignificant  role 

and  maintaining 

engagement  over 

Providers help clients realize deeper goals and motivations 
The  success  of  the  services  that  we  studied  depended  on 
clients’  presence  and  active  participation.  Providers 
explained  that  understanding  clients’  goals  was  critical  for 
time. 
eliciting 
Sometimes, however, clients did not think about or initially 
share their deeper motivations with service providers. Here, 
providers  guided  clients  to  think  more  deeply  about  their 
goals  and  motivations,  so  that  they  could  personalize  their 
interactions  and  sustain  client  motivation  over  time.  For 
example,  a  personal  trainer  said  he  tried  to  understand  the 
deeper  motivations  of  his  clients,  even  when  they  initially 
appeared to have well-defined goals:  

(My clients) may say that their goal is to lose ten pounds, or 
lower  their  BMI,  blood  pressure  or  to  be  more  fit  or 
healthy;  these  are  very  generic  goals,  and  are  not  what 
truly motivates them. For example…  they have known that 
they may die early if they do not change their lifestyles, but 
this  did  not  prompt  or  motivate  them  to  change  and  come 
here.  There  is  always  something  more  emotional  and 
motivating for different individuals, even though it may not 
be related to their biggest problem (threats to their health). 
So I keep asking ‘why’ to truly understand that motivation. 
At the end, they say it is to fit into their jeans that they used 
to  wear  when  they  were  young…  or  look  better  to  their 
husband, or get over the break-up.  

What  is  noteworthy  here  is  that  the  service  provider’s  role 
is to repeatedly ask questions to get at hidden motivations. 
Providers  used  this  information  to  tailor  service  offerings 
and interactions. For example, the personal trainer used this 
information  to  personalize  his  exercise  programs  and  his 
feedback  to  clients,  so  that  he  could  support  the  goals  that 
clients  cared  most  about.  A  personal  tutor  used  his 
understanding  of  a  student’s  goal  of  going  to  pharmacy 
school  in  tailoring  examples  that  he  used  to  explain  math 
and chemistry concepts. These shared experiences made the 
client-provider relationship more collaborative and caring. 

DESIGNING REFLECTIVE PERSONALIZATION 
Our  study  of  human  service  providers  shows  that  service 
providers  seek  to  understand  clients’  deeper  goals  and 
motivations, and use this knowledge to create personalized 
plans  and  maintain  motivation  through  tailored  feedback. 
What is critical in this process is the very first step in which 
providers  guide  their  clients  to  reflect  on  and  articulate 
what  motivates  them,  so  that  clients  can  orient  themselves 

745

to  their  underlying  needs  and  goals.  This  focus  contrasts 
starkly  with  how  computer-based  services  are  currently 
personalized.  Most  current  technology  services,  such  as 
online shopping and education websites, product and news 
recommendations, and health management tools do not help 
users  determine  their  goals.  Instead,  they  either  prescribe 
services  that  systems  think  will  work  best  for  users,  or 
allow  users  to  personalize  the  solution  spaces  of  their 
services on the assumption that the users’ goals at the time 
of  personalization  are  fully  realized.  This  insight  played  a 
key role in designing the reflective strategy, which prompts 
users to think more deeply about their goals through a series 
of questions. 

How questions facilitate reflective personalization  
The  reflective  strategies  and  processes  that  human  service 
providers use are greatly nuanced. These processes include 
rapport  and  trust  creation  through  shared  goals,  and 
interactive,  dialogue-based  goal  and  reflection  elicitation. 
We  distilled  these  processes  into  open-ended  questions, 
focusing  particularly  on  the  “why”  question,  to  translate 
human  conversational  strategies  into  computational  ones. 
The  simplicity  and  feasibility  of  open-ended  questions 
allow  for  the  flexible  application  of  the  strategy  in  a  wide 
array of tasks and domains. We then turned to the literature 
on  reflection  in  order  to  gain  insights  into  the  effects  of 
reflection beyond those we observed in our interview study. 

Why “why” works 
Previous  research  suggests  that  asking  reflective  questions 
can help people articulate their underlying needs and goals 
and increase their motivation to use a service. The reflective 
strategy  may  elicit  contemplative  [25]  or  metacognitive 
[16]  thinking,  allowing  people  to  think  about  their  needs 
and  wants  beyond  the  first  answers  that  come  to  mind. 
Research suggests that asking people their reasons for doing 
an  activity  triggers  their  underlying  motivations  and  leads 
them to focus on higher-level goals [8, 61]. This reasoning 
can help people overcome potential decision biases [41] and 
give people opportunities to personalize service features to 
better satisfy their underlying needs and goals.  

Reflective strategies may encourage people to focus on the 
long-term  consequences  of 
their  choices  and  make 
decisions that are more in line with their ideal selves. In one 
study, people who were asked to think about why they eat 
snacks before making a choice were more likely to choose 
healthy  options  [17].  In  another  study,  people  exerted 
greater  self-control  tolerating  physical  discomfort  when 
they were reminded of the purpose of the activity [17, 61]. 
This  suggests  that  a  reflective  strategy  can  be  particularly 
useful  for  services  in  which  people  might  benefit  from 
orienting themselves to long-term, deeper goals. 

Greater  awareness  of  underlying  needs  and  goals  attached 
to ideal selves can increase people’s motivation for using a 
service. Research shows that people are motivated to satisfy 
their own needs [39] and to work on tasks that match their 
identities  [1,  52].  In  the  absence  of  the  reflective  strategy, 

people  may  not  consider  their  individual  motivations  and 
goals when personalizing services. 

How to ask “why” to elicit reflection 
The  success  of  reflective  questions  depends  on  whether 
they  elicit  deeper  reflection.  When  service  providers 
interact  with  clients,  they  often  ask  follow-up  questions. 
There  is  also  social  pressure  for  clients  to  cooperate  with 
the  providers.  Without  the  dialogue  and  social  pressure, 
people may be less inclined to comply with computer-based 
services, and provide only superficial answers to questions. 
In order to address these challenges, we reviewed previous 
research 
techniques  were  used 
successfully  and  adopted  several  of  these  in  our  design. 
These 
twice  [17], 
instructing  clients  to  take  more  time  to  think  about  the 
question,  and  asking  clients  to  write  longer  answers  than 
they usually would do [54]. 

included  asking  “why”  questions 

in  which 

reflective 

Goal-setting and planning in personal health tracking 
We  evaluated  the  efficacy  of  the  reflective  strategy  in  the 
task of creating personalized plans for health. We built the 
Fitbit  Plan  website,  where  Fitbit  users  could  set  up 
personalized two-week plans for increasing their daily steps 
with the reflective strategy.  

Goal-setting and planning 
Among  the  many  service  aspects  that  can  be  personalized, 
we  focused  on  goal-setting  and  planning.  Goal-setting  and 
planning  are  widely-used  service  features  in  a  number  of 
domains  [37].  They  are  only  a  small  part  of  the  larger 
service process, generally taking place once at the start of a 
service,  but  they  are  a  critical  part  of  the  service  process. 
They  can  have  a  cascading  effect;  once  people  set  their 
goals, they tend not to change the settings over the duration 
of the usage [48, 58]. In addition, allowing for goal-setting 
and  planning  has  been  shown  to  improve  people’s  service 
adherence and motivation [37]. 

The domain of personal health tracking 
Many  digital  technologies  are  currently  changing  how 
people  manage  their  health  by  offering  aggregated  sensor 
data  and  tools  to  document  and  manage  health-related 

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

behavior.  Much  HCI  research  has  investigated  different 
ways  to  use  digital  technologies  to  improve  how  people 
manage their health [9, 12, 19, 20, 29, 36, 38, 43, 49]. 

We used Fitbit [14], a physical activity tracker, as the basis 
for  our  personalized  service  design.  Walking  is  a  critical 
activity in personal health, as walking 10,000 steps or more 
daily  has  been  shown  to  offer  many  health  benefits  [22]. 
The  Fitbit  website  offers  both  user-driven  and  system-
driven  personalization  features  for  goal  setting  and 
planning.  Fitbit  users  can  set  up  a  single  goal  for  their 
activity  by  typing  in  the  number  of  steps  they  desire  to 
achieve. If Fitbit users want to set up a plan to increase their 
daily  steps,  they  can  enroll  in  a  “personal  trainer”  service 
with a yearly subscription fee. This feature presents a plan 
in  which  daily  step  goals  increase  from  a  current  baseline. 
Users can follow the plan to increase physical activity. 

Fitbit Plan Website 
On the Fitbit Plan website, Fitbit users could set up a two-
week  goal  and  track  their  progress  (Figure  1).  The  Fitbit 
Plan  was  built  on  Google  App  Engine  using  Fitbit 
Developer API. Highcharts JS was used to visualize users’ 
progress,  and  a  portion  of  back-end  implementation  was 
adopted from [12]. Once users signed up to the website and 
gave their consent, Fitbit Plan automatically retrieved users’ 
daily step data from their Fitbit accounts. Fitbit Plan asked 
six reflective questions designed to guide people in thinking 
about  their  underlying  motivations  and  goals,  and  to 
discover  easy  ways  to  implement  them  and  remove  any 
barriers  to  healthier  lifestyles.  Users  could  then  create 
personalized  two-week  plans.  Alternatively,  Fitbit  Plan 
recommended  a  personalized  plan  based  on  baseline  steps 
and recommended guidelines.  

EVALUATING REFLECTIVE PERSONALIZATION 
We  conducted  a  2x2  between-subjects  field  experiment. 
The effect of the reflective strategy was evaluated with two 
main  personalization  methods  –  user-driven  and  system-
driven  personalization.  Recruitment  and  administration  of 
the  study  took  place  entirely  online  through  email  and  on 
the Fitbit Plan website. 

Figure 1. ©Min Kyung Lee. Fitbit Plan website 

746

SESSION: PERSUASIVE AND PERSONAL

Hypotheses 
Based  on  our  goals  of  articulating  needs  and  increasing 
motivation  to  use  a  personalized  service,  we  explored  the 
following hypotheses in the study:  

Hypothesis  1.  The  reflective  strategy  will  help  people 
articulate their underlying needs, goals and motivations for 
increasing physical activities. 

Hypothesis  2.  People  will  be  more  motivated  to  carry  out 
the  personalized  health  plan  by  a  technology  system  that 
employs the reflective strategy than by one that does not. 

Participants 
We recruited Fitbit users who wanted to increase their daily 
steps  and  try  a  daily-steps  planning  website.  We  posted  a 
call  for  research  participation  on  online  Fitbit  community 
boards,  and  on  Facebook,  Craigslist,  and  Twitter  using  the 
Fitbit  hashtag.  We  used  a  pre-survey  to  limit  participation 
to those who were older than 18 years, resided in US, were 
not  pregnant,  were  proficient  English  speakers,  self-
reported  that  they  wore  their  Fitbit  almost  everyday,  and 
intended to increase their daily steps. In total, we recruited 
62  Fitbit  users  (74%  female,  age  ranges  from  19.5  to  68 
(M=38.7  (SE=1.62)).  37  were  Caucasian,  9  were  Asian 
American, 2 were Hispanic, 2 were of mixed origins, 1 was 
African  American,  and  the  rest  did  not  wish  to  report.  On 
average, participants had used Fitbit for 8 months (SE=1.44 
month).  Participants  who  completed  the  two-week  long 
study were compensated with a $10 Amazon gift card. 

Experimental conditions  
The  experiment  manipulated  whether  or  not  participants 
answered  reflective  questions  and  who  personalized  the 
two-week plan, the user or the system (Table 1). 

User-driven 
System-driven 

Reflective 
N=15 (11) 
N=17 (11) 

Non-reflective 
N=14 (11) 
N=16 (7) 

Table 1. Field experiment conditions and participant numbers. 
The first numbers indicate participants who set up their plans 
and filled out the Day 0 survey. The numbers in parentheses 
indicate participants who used Fitbit Plan and filled out the 
Day 14 survey. 

Reflective strategy conditions 
Six  reflective  questions  were  presented  right  before 
participants  were  asked  to  construct  their  plans.  The  first 
question  asked  why  they  wanted  to  increase  their  daily 
steps. The second question asked them to elaborate on their 
first  answers  (“OK.  Think  about  what  you  just  described. 
Why  is  this  important  to  you?”).  We  encouraged  them  to 
think about this question for at least one minute, but we did 
not  force  them  using  a  timer.  The  next  questions  asked 
about easy ways to start moving toward their goal, expected 
barriers,  and  their  plans  for  addressing  those  barriers,  in 
order  to  help  them  think  about  realistic  goals.  Finally,  we 
asked how many minutes they could spend walking without 
disrupting  their  routines.  Participants’  answers  to  these 

questions were displayed on the page along with a graph of 
their goals and progress. 

Personalization conditions 
In the user-driven condition, Fitbit Plan asked users to type 
in  daily  step  goals  for  two  weeks.  As  a  baseline  and  a 
reference,  the  page  showed  their  average  steps  during  the 
previous  two  weeks.  We  asked  them  to  create  a  plan  that 
was  challenging  (more  than  their  baseline),  yet  realistic 
(achievable  without  requiring  major  effort).  To  encourage 
success,  we  also  told  them  to  try  to  accommodate  their 
schedules.  Once  they  typed  in  their  goals,  the  goals  were 
presented as a graph on the next page. 

In  the  system-driven  condition,  Fitbit  Plan  devised  a 
personalized  two-week  plan  by  following  US  Health 
agency recommendations, as well as guidelines for walking 
programs  used  in  academic  research  and  suggested  by 
popular  health  information  resource  sites  such  as  Mayo 
Clinic. Fitbit Plan used the participant’s average number of 
steps  for  the  previous  two  weeks  as  a  baseline.  We  told 
participants 
followed  US  Health  agency 
recommendations to create a challenging yet realistic plan. 
The  system  gradually  increased  their  daily  steps,  raising 
their  baselines  by  2,000  additional  steps  by  the  end  of  the 
first  week  and  by  an  additional  1,500  by  the  end  of  the 
second week. This resulted in a 3,500 daily step increase on 
the  last  day  of  the  two  weeks,  with  an  average  daily  step 
time  –  approximately 
increase  of  2,000  during 
equivalent to an additional 20 minutes of walking each day. 

that  we 

that 

Once participants set up a two-week plan, they could track 
their progress in relation to their goals on Fitbit Plan. They 
were  not  able  to  modify  the  plan  during  the  two-week 
period.  We  made  this  choice  intentionally;  the  two-week 
plan is a good way for participants to explore their limits. If 
they  wanted  to  continue  to  increase  their  daily  steps  or 
maintain  their  increased  steps,  they  could  make  changes 
after  two  weeks.  This  also  allowed  us  to  control  the 
experimental manipulation. 

Procedure 
People who contacted the study organizer were asked to fill 
out  a  pre-survey.  Qualified  participants  were  randomly 
assigned  to  one  of  the  four  conditions.  We  created  four 
versions  of  Fitbit  Plan,  in  order  to  satisfy  each  condition. 
The  study  organizer  sent  each  participant  an  email  with  a 
link to an online consent form and the instructions on how 
to  set  up  a  two-week  long  plan  to  increase  daily  steps  on 
Fitbit Plan. Then participants were asked to fill out the Day 
0 survey. After two weeks of using Fitbit Plan, participants 
were asked to fill out the Day 14 survey, and compensated. 
No  reminders  were  sent  to  the  participants  during  the  two 
weeks of the study period. 

Data sources and measures 
We  collected  behavioral  and  subjective  data  from  the 
website’s plan and daily step logs and from the surveys. 

747

 
Two-week plan and daily step logs 
We  used  daily  step  logs  on  Fitbit  Plan  to  understand  how 
well  the  participants  carried  out  their  plans.  To  calculate 
changes  in  daily  steps,  we  compared  their  daily  average 
over  two  weeks  of  study  participation  with  their  baseline, 
which  was  their  daily  average  from  the  two  weeks  before 
the  study.  There  were  no  differences  in  the  baseline 
numbers  of  daily  steps  across  the  conditions  (Daily 
M=9,801 (SD=5,541)). To calculate each participant’s plan 
completion  rate,  we  averaged  the  ratio  of  the  step  goal  in 
the plan with the actual steps that the participant walked for 
each day over two weeks. For participants who created their 
own plans (user-driven), we analyzed the goals that they set 
for  two  weeks  by  calculating  how  many  daily  steps,  on 
average, participants planned to increase over two weeks.  

to 

Answers to reflective questions 
We  examined  participants’  answers 
the  reflective 
questions to see whether the questions elicited reflection on 
then 
their  underlying  motivations  and  goals.  We 
categorized  their  answers  by  the  types  of  reasons  that 
participants provided, how they felt their goals contributed 
to their identities, and whether their reasoning was based on 
emotion, past experience, or knowledge. We also calculated 
the length of the answers. 

Surveys 
We  conducted  an 
initial  Day  0  survey  right  after 
participants  set  up  their  plan,  and  an  exit  Day  14  survey 
after  their  two-week  usage.  We  asked  the  same  question 
sets  as  repeated  measures  to  detect  changes.  All  questions 
used 7-point Likert-type scales, unless noted otherwise. 

Initial  survey  (Day  0).  We  asked  about  participants’ 
experiences of setting up the plan. 

Perceived  control  over  the  personalization  process.  Two 
items asked whether people felt that they had an appropriate 
level of control over the process (Cronbach’s α=.8): “I felt 
that I had an appropriate level of control over the process of 
setting  up  the  plan”  and  “I  felt  that  I  could  influence  the 
process and outcome of setting up the plan.” 

Engagement  with  the  personalization  process:  Two  items 
measured  how  engaged  people  were  in  creating  the  plan  
(Cronbach’s  α=.8):  “I  was  highly  motivated  to  pay  close 
attention  to  this  plan,”  and  “While  creating  this  plan,  I 
could have worked harder on it.” 

Motivation  to  carry  out  the  personalized  plan:  Five  items 
adopted  from  [57]  measured  how  motivated  participants 
were to follow the plan that they created at the moment of 
creation  (Cronbach’s  α=.7):  “Doing  well  on  this  plan  is 
important  to  me,”  “I  will  put  in  good  effort  throughout 
following  this  plan,”  “I  am  not  concerned  about  how 
successfully I will carry out this plan,” “I will put forward 
my  best  effort  in  carrying  out  this  plan,”  and  “While 
following this plan, I will persist to completion of the plan.” 

748

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

Perception of services being personalized: Two items asked 
how personalized the participants felt their plans were [27] 
(Cronbach α=.82): “The plan is personalized for me and my 
context,” and “This plan accommodates what I want.” 

Perceived  difficulty  of  and  satisfaction  with  the  plan:  One 
question asked how much effort participants would need to 
put  into  completing  the  plan.  We  also  asked  how  satisfied 
participants were with the plan. 

Manipulation checks: We asked how helpful Fitbit Plan had 
been  in  guiding  participants  to  think  about  their  goals  and 
constraints,  and  how  evenly  participants  felt  the  work  of 
setting  up  the  plan  had  been  divided  between  themselves 
and the Fitbit Plan website.  

Exit  survey  (Day  14).  The  questions  in  the  Day  0  survey–
motivation  to  carry  out  the  plan,  perceived  level  of 
personalization  and  difficulty,  and  satisfaction  with  the 
plan– were rephrased to measure how participants felt while 
carrying out their plan rather than at the moment of creation. 
Additional questions asked how often they had remembered 
their daily goals, how much they enjoyed following the plan, 
and  whether  they  wanted  to  decrease,  maintain  or  increase 
their daily steps going forward. 

Results 
The  study  evaluated  the  effects  of  adding  a  reflective 
strategy to prevalent personalization strategies – user-driven 
and  system-driven  personalization.  Both  of  our  hypotheses 
were  supported,  suggesting  that  the  reflective  strategy  can 
help users of personalized services achieve their goals. 

(Reflective=4.78 

Manipulation check 
Our  manipulations  were  successful.  Participants  in  the 
reflective conditions felt that Fitbit Plan helped them think 
about  their  motivations  and  goals  before  setting  up  their 
plans 
(SE=.26),  Non-reflective=3.1 
(SE=.27),  F(1,60)=20.17,  p<.0001).  Participants  in  the 
system-driven  conditions  felt  that  Fitbit  Plan  did  most  of 
the  work  (User-driven=2.28  (SE=.3),  System-driven=5.33 
(SE=.28), F(1, 60)=55.8, p<.0001; 1=“I did the most work” 
and 7=“Fitbit Plan did the most work.”) 

Effects of reflective personalization on thinking about goals 
Participants  in  the  reflective  condition  gave  a  variety  of 
reasons for wanting to increase their daily steps which were 
consistent  with  previous  research  [45].  When  asked  “Why 
do  you  want  to  increase  your  physical  activity,  especially 
walking?”  participants  gave  short  and  generic  answers 
using  a  few  phrases  (M=14.7  words  (SD=13)).  The  most 
commonly-mentioned  reasons  were  “weight  loss”  (N=16) 
and  “improved  health”  (N=13),  followed  by  “improved 
mood or energy” (N=9), “fitness (N=5),” and other smaller 
categories. 

Asking the why question again–“Ok. Think about what you 
just  described.  Why  is  this  important  to  you?”–was 
effective  in  encouraging  participants  to  think  about  their 
motivations  more  deeply.  Participants  were  asked  to 

SESSION: PERSUASIVE AND PERSONAL

elaborate on their reasons by giving three examples, which 
resulted  in  an  average  of  111.6  words  (SD=57)  in  total. 
Each  reason  fell  into  at  least  one  of  three  categories  based 
on whether it concerned the participant’s individual, social, 
frequently,  participants 
or  environmental  self.  Most 
mentioned 
their  work 
they  wanted 
productivity,  athletic  ability,  mindfulness,  self-confidence 
based on appearance, feelings of achievement, or longevity. 
Some  participants  mentioned  social  reasons,  such  as 
becoming better parents or having good times with friends. 
A  few  participants  mentioned  experiencing  their  cities  and 
becoming closer to nature.  

improve 

that 

to 

response,  which 

More interesting, however, was the richness and uniqueness 
of  each  participant’s 
in 
categorization.  Many  participants  described  very  personal 
contexts,  experiences,  and  emotions.  The  quotes  below 
exemplify  how  participants  expanded  their  initial  answers, 
such  as  weight  loss  or  improved  health,  to  elaborate  what 
they wanted to achieve by being physically active: 

lost 

is 

Better  relationships  -  I  feel  that  people  judge  me  because 
I'm  so  skinny  without  being  athletic.  I  almost  feel  more 
unathletic  than  the  majority  of  my  peers  and  that  worries 
me; I get anxious if I get invited to any athletic event and I 
want that to stop. (P30) 

I'm 49 years old and I can feel my memory and as a result 
my cognition slowly declining. I want to do everything I can 
to  make  it  through  my  80s  with  most  of  my  marbles  --  I 
especially  don't  want  my  kids  to  have  to  be  burdened  with 
taking  care  of  me  if  I  have  Alzheimer’s  or  other  senility.  I 
would like to be strong and playing with my grandkids! (P3) 

Being  connected  with  nature  is  also  important  to  me, 
because I spend all too much time indoors with my day job.  
Having a moment to reconnect with the outdoors helps me 
to  be  a  more  grounded,  centered  person  with  the  proper 
perspective  on  life.  Whether  outdoors  near  the  lake  or  in 
the  garden,  having  that  perspective  really  helps  me  stay 
sane. (P31) 

When I have more energy I can be productive at work. I can 
think clearer and have better ideas, and not just go through 
a day supported by caffeine. (P16) 

Being more active will help [me] keep up with my son. He 
is  a  very  active  boy  and  there  are  days  I  cannot  keep  up 
with him. I want him to be proud of me. (P8) 

While  most  participants  described  what  they  wanted  to 
achieve,  some  participants’  sought  to  avoid  potential 
negative  consequences  of  not  being  physically  active.  For 
example,  P13  said:  A  close  family  member  recently  had  a 
heart  attack  and  passed  away.  He  never  took  super  good 
care of himself, and I'd really like to avoid that. 

P15  said:  My  family  has  a  pretty  bad  health  history:  high 
blood pressure, lots of cancer. I don't want to be like them 
and getting more activity may help.  

749

A  few  participants  described  scientific,  mechanical,  or 
numeric views of their goals. For example, P6 explained: by 
moving  more  I  burn  more  calories  during  the  day  and  so 
can  sustain  a  greater  amount  of  food  intake  (and  I  like  to 
eat). P22 wanted to increase physical activity to “lower my 
cholesterol  which  is  extremely  high,”  and  P29  hoped  “my 
heart rate and blood pressure will drop.” 

Some  participants  reflected  on  their  personal  observations 
and on lessons learned from past experiences. For example, 
P18  said:  I find that I can wake up early on any day and in 
a  good  mood  after  I  sleep  well,  which  in  turn  correlates 
with how much physical exercise I did the preceding day.  

P5 said: If I don't exercise for a while, I feel weak and might 
gasp  after  just  [a  few  minutes’]  walk.  Also,  if  I  sit  or  stay 
motionless for [a] long time, I feel sleepy. 

A  few  participants  also  mentioned  plans  for  change.  For 
example,  P11  said:  I know working out, especially walking 
outdoors,  always  improves  my  mood.  Why  is  it  then,  that 
days  can  go  by  when  I  lack  motivation  and  don't  walk? 
Inertia sets in. I really need to have a daily plan. 

Effects  of  reflective  personalization  on  the  experience  of 
plan creation 
The  analysis  of  the  initial  Day  0  survey  suggests  that  the 
reflective  strategy  mitigated  some  negative  impacts  of 
system-driven  personalization  on  how  participants  felt 
about  their  plans.  The  reflective  strategy  increased  the 
extent  to  which  participants  felt  that  the  system-generated 
plans  had  been  personalized  for  them  and  how  satisfied 
they were with the system-generated plans (Table 2).  

Reflective 

Non-reflective 

Perceived level of 
personalization 
Satisfaction 

5.32(.34) 

5.29(.31) 

4.25(.35)*1 

4.38(.32)*2 

Table 2. Effect of reflective, system-driven personalization on 
a) perceived level of personalization of the plan and b) 
satisfaction with the plan (The numbers show the least squared means and the 
standard error in parentheses. *p < .05, 1F(1,31) = 4.75, 2F(1,31) = 4.21 ) 

User-driven 

System-driven 

Reflective 

5.07(.33) 

Non-
reflective 
6.14(.34)*1 

Reflective 

4.82(.31) 

Non-
reflective 
3.06(.31)***2 

Perceived 
control 

Table 3. Effect of reflective, system-driven personalization on 
perceived control (The numbers show the least squared means and the standard error in 
parentheses. *p < .05, ***p < .001, 1F(1,58) = 5.2, 2F(1,58) = 15.84) 

There  was  an  interaction  effect  (F(3,  58)=15.35,  p<.001) 
between  the  use  of  the  reflective  strategy  and  the  type  of 
personalization on perceived control over the set-up process 
(Table  3).  With  the  system-generated  plans,  participants 
reported  perceiving  very  limited  control  over  the  set-up 
process.  However,  answering  reflective  questions  before 
receiving the plan significantly increased participants’ sense 
of  control  throughout  the  process.  The  opposite  effect  was 
observed  with  the  user-created  plans.  Participants  reported 

 
 
 
perceiving  greater  control  when  they  did  not  answer 
reflective  questions  than when  they  did.  This  suggests  that 
participants may have felt the questions were guiding their 
thoughts and plan creation experiences. 

However,  neither  the  reflective  strategy  nor  the  type  of 
impact  on  how  motivated 
personalization  had  any 
participants  felt  to  follow  their  plans  at  the  moment  of 
creation.  Participants 
in  all  conditions  were  highly 
motivated  (M=5.9  (SE=.1)).  There  were  also  no  statistical 
differences  in  the  perceived  difficulty  of  successfully 
carrying  out  the  plan  (M=3.74  (SE=.18)  or  engagement 
with the personalization process (M=4.53 (SE=.15)). 

Effects of reflective personalization on plan creation 
In the system-driven personalization condition, the plan was 
created to help participants increase 2,000 steps on average. 
In  the  user-driven  personalization  condition,  those  who 
answered  reflective  questions  aimed  to  increase  their  steps 
by a marginally greater amount than did those who did not 
(Reflective  &  User-
answer 
driven=3,198 
(SE=738),  Non-reflective  &  User-
driven=1,133 (SE=764), F(1,27)=3.77, p=.06) (Figure 2a).  

reflective 

questions 

Effects of reflective personalization on plan completion 
22 participants stopped logging into the Fitbit Plan website, 
but  the  number  of  dropouts  did  not  significantly  differ 
across  conditions  (Table  1).  The  following  analysis  was 
done  with  the  remaining  40  participants.  The  average 
number of daily steps for this sample was 9,311 (SE=700).  

the 

To  examine  whether 
reflective  strategy  helped 
participants  increase  their  daily  steps,  we  conducted  a 
MANOVA 
that  compared  each  participant’s  baseline 
number of daily steps to their average number of daily steps 
over two weeks in each condition. The results suggest that 
the  reflective  strategy  effectively  motivated  participants  to 
walk  more  (Figure  2b).  Participants  who  answered 
their  plans 
reflective  questions  before 
significantly took more steps compared to their baseline on 
average,  regardless  of  whether they  customized  their  plans 
themselves  (Reflective  &  User-driven:  Baseline=10,589 
(SE=1,741), 
Two-week  M=12,543 
(SE=1,830), 
F(1,10)=14.49,  p=.004)  or  received  their  plans  from  the 
(Reflective  &  System-driven:  Baseline=8,666 
system 

they  set  up 

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

(SE=1,159), 
(SE=1,022), 
Two-week  M=11,564 
F(1,10)=10.12, p<.01). Participants who did not answer the 
reflective  questions  showed  no  significant  changes  in  their 
average daily steps as compared to baseline (Non-reflective 
&  User-driven:  Baseline=9,733  (SE=1,241),  Two-week 
M=10,420  (SE=1,335),  p=n.s.;  Non-reflective  &  System-
driven:  Baseline=7,652  (SE=916),  Two-week  M=8,556 
(SE=847), p=n.s.).  

All  participants  completed  their  goals  fairly  well.  In  the 
user-driven  conditions,  participants  who  answered  the 
reflective questions walked 93% (SE=7.23%) of their daily 
goals on average, while those who did not answer questions 
walked  95.26%  (SE=5.86%)  of  their  goals.  In  the  system-
driven conditions, participants who answered the reflective 
(123.3% 
questions 
(SE=17.7%)),  whereas  those  who  did  not  answer  the 
questions walked 92.8% (SE=8.09%) of their goals.  

their  goals 

exceeded 

actually 

Effects  of  reflective  personalization  on  the  experience  of 
carrying out the plan 
We  ran  a  regression  analysis  of  the  Day  14  survey  to 
understand  participants’  experiences  of  carrying  out  their 
plans  across  the  different  conditions.  All  participants 
equally reported that they remembered their goals and plan 
often  (M=4.45  (SE=.27),  4=“often”,  5=“very  often”),  and 
wanted  to  maintain  or  increase  their  daily  steps  after  the 
study  (M=2.42  (SE=.1),  2=“maintain  my  current  daily 
steps,” 3=“further increase my daily steps”).  

We  used  MANOVA  to  analyze  the  repeated  measures  in 
both  the  Day  0  and  Day  14  surveys,  in  order  to  compare 
participants’  expectations  about  their  plans  to  their  actual 
experiences.  The  results  suggest  that  participants  in  the 
reflective  conditions  found  their  plans  more  difficult,  and 
felt  that  it  had  taken  them  more  effort  to  successfully 
complete  their  plans  than  they  had  initially  thought  (Table 
4a).  When  no  reflective  strategy  was  used,  participants’ 
expectations and actual experiences of the difficulty of their 
plans  did  not  differ.  Consistent  with 
this  perceived 
difficulty,  participants  in  the  reflective  conditions  reported 
less enjoyment in the experience of carrying out their plans 
in  the  Day  14  survey  (Reflective=4.7  (SE=.27),  Non-
reflective=5.53 (SE=.3),  F(1, 37) = 4.59, p=.04).  

Figure 2. a) The effect of reflective personalization on the goals that participants set up in the user-driven personalization. b) The 
effects of reflective personalization on how participants carried out their plans. 

750

 
 
SESSION: PERSUASIVE AND PERSONAL

User-driven 

System-driven 

Reflective 

Non-reflective 

Reflective 

Non-reflective 

a) Difficulty  
b) Motivation 

Day 0 
4.18(.3) 
5.66(.2) 

Day 14 
5.1(.43)*1 
4.66(.37)*** 3 

Day 0 
3.8(.33) 
5.8(.18) 

Day 14 
4.4(.44) 
5.38(.37) 

Day 0 
3.54(.6) 
5.87(.2) 

Day 14 
4.8(.41)t2 
5.23(.36)* 4 

Day 0 
3.57(.57) 
6.2(.2) 

Day 14 
4.1(.52) 
5.4(.45)* 5 

Table 4. a) Perceived (Day 0) vs actual (Day 14) effort required to carry out the plan, b) Participant motivation at the time of 
the plan creation (Day 0) vs while carrying out the plan (Day 14) (The numbers show the least squared means and the standard error in parentheses. tp < .1, *p < .05, 
*** p < .001, 1F(1,9) = 7.5, 2F(1,10) = 4.43, 3F(1,9) = 25, 4F(1,10) = 7.75, 5F(1,6) = 9.6 ) 

Most  participants,  with  the  exception  of  those  in  the  non-
reflective,  user-driven  condition,  reported  that  they  were 
less  motivated  than  they  anticipated  right  after  they  set  up 
the plans (Table 4b). Only participants in the non-reflective 
user-driven  condition,  who  set  easier  goals,  felt  that  they 
were  as  motivated  to  successfully  carry  out  their  plans  as 
they  had  expected  to  be.  Participants’  satisfaction  with  the 
plans  and  the  extent  to  which  they  felt  the  plans  had  been 
personalized  did  not  change  over  time  and  did  not  differ 
across  conditions  (Satisfaction=4.8  (SE=.26);  Perceived 
personalization=4.89 (SE=.26)).  

Discussion 

How reflective personalization worked 
The  results  suggest  that  the  reflective  personalization 
increased people’s daily walking with both user-driven and 
system-driven  personalized  plans.  Participants  spent  fewer 
than  10  minutes  answering  questions  before  setting  up  the 
two-week plan, yet the simple reflection strategy seemed to 
have an impact on participants’ later behaviors. 

When  participants  customized  their  plans,  the  reflective 
strategy  influenced  them  to  set  ambitious  goals,  and  they 
successfully  completed,  on  average,  93%  of  these  goals. 
Without  the  reflective  strategy,  participants  created  easier 
and less ambitious plans than did those using the reflective 
strategy  or  those  using  plans  created  by  Fitbit  Plan,  which 
were  based  on  physical  activity  guidelines.  Even  though 
these participants completed 95% of their goals, their daily 
activity did not significantly increase as they aimed small.  

When  the  service  personalized  plans  for  participants,  the 
reflective strategy caused them to overachieve and actually 
walk  more  than  the  system  had  suggested.  Without  the 
reflective  strategy,  participants  completed  93%  of  their 
goals  on  average,  which  did  not  result  in  a  statistically 
significant increase in their daily steps. 

Consistent with the literature on reflection presented in the 
beginning  of  the  paper,  we  believe  that  participants’ 
reflection  on 
their 
their  underlying  goals 
motivation to set up and carry out their ambitious plans, and 
even to walk more than system-generated plan suggested.  

improved 

Although  reflective  personalization  was  successful 
in 
increasing  participants’  daily  steps,  the  survey  results 
suggest that participants in the reflective condition felt their 
plans  were  more  difficult  than  they  had  expected.  They 
enjoyed  following  the  plans  less  than  those  in  the  non-
reflective  condition  did.  Except  for  the  participants  in  the 

non-reflective,  user-driven  condition,  who  set  easier  goals, 
participants  felt  that  they  were  less  motivated  when 
carrying  out  their  plans  than  they  had  initially  anticipated. 
We  believe  that  system-created  and  reflection-based  goals 
were  more  challenging  than  the  goals  that  participants 
created  without  reflection.  These  goals  therefore  required 
participants  to  put  in  more  effort  than  they  had  expected, 
and led them to feel less motivated to complete their goals. 
Nevertheless,  participants 
the  reflective  condition 
in 
successfully  increased  their  daily  steps,  and  were  just  as 
likely  as  other  participants  to  want  to  maintain  or  increase 
their daily steps after the study.  

No effect of user vs. system-driven personalization 
The  type  of  personalization  did  not  significantly  influence 
participants’  motivations  to  carry  out  their  plans.  This  is 
consistent  with  previous  research  on  goal-setting,  which 
shows  that  while  having  a  goal  matters,  whether  people 
create  the  goal  or  have  the  goal  assigned  makes  little 
difference in terms of motivation [37].  

Reflecting with technology vs. with human service providers 
We  translated  a  human-human  interaction  strategy  into  a 
self-guided,  reflective  process.  Unlike  the  human  service 
providers in our interview studies, Fitbit Plan did not offer 
opportunities  to  create  rapport,  bond  over  shared  goals,  or 
hold  participants  accountable  through  social  pressure  and 
encouragement. While this translation sacrificed the human 
aspects  of  the  reflective  strategy,  reflection  guided  by  the 
website may have helped people be more honest with their 
answers  and  prompted  self-reflection,  thus  improving  their 
motivation to follow their plans. 

LIMITATIONS 
The  experiment  only  lasted  two  weeks  and  was  conducted 
with  a  small  sample  of  existing  Fitbit  users  with  different 
levels  of  physical  activity.  The  reflective  strategy  was 
successful in motivating these relatively active participants. 
It  is  unknown  whether  the  strategy  can  effectively  modify 
the  behaviors  of  more  sedentary  populations.  While  the 
two-week long trial offers initial evidence that the reflective 
strategy can prompt behavior change, it is unclear whether 
the  effect  can  be  sustained  beyond  the  two  weeks.  It  is 
possible  that  the  reflective  questions  would  need  to  be 
asked  multiple  times  in  order  to  achieve  a  longer-lasting 
effect.  The  results  of  our  study  therefore  need  to  be 
validated  through  a  longer-term  study  with  a  larger  and 
more  general  sample.  The  dropout  rate  was  higher  in  our 
study than in most other studies in which the experimenter 
interacted  with  participants  face-to-face  or  distributed 

751

 
devices. We attribute this higher dropout rate to the fact that 
the  study  was  administered  entirely  through  email  and  the 
Fitbit Plan website, that no reminders were used during the 
study,  and  that  participants  used  their  own  Fitbit  devices. 
The lack of interaction with the experimenter or liability for 
the  device  may  have  caused  participants  to  feel  less 
committed to the study. This dropout rate also suggests that 
the reflective strategy might be more effective with people 
with stronger motivation for behavior change. 

IMPLICATIONS  

of 

that 

Empowering people to better personalize 
Our  work  broadens  the  current  scope  and  focus  of 
personalization.  We  are  not  arguing 
reflective 
personalization  should  replace  current  ways  of  technology 
of  personalization;  rather,  we  argue  that  the  reflective 
strategy can be used to complement and strengthen existing 
methods 
automatically 
personalization.  While 
personalizing digital environments and goals and providing 
options  for  users  to  customize  is  a  good  start,  it  is  equally 
important 
to  better  understand 
themselves.  This  is  an  element  of  personalization  that 
digital behavior traces cannot capture. As a community, we 
in  HCI  must  think  about  how  we  can  empower  people  to 
personalize  for  themselves.  The  work  presented  in  this 
paper  offers  one  such  methods  of  personalization,  and  the 
results of our field study suggest that this strategy can work 
in  combination  with  other  methods  of 
effectively 
personalization as well.  

to  empower  people 

Designing for motivation and reflection 
Our  work  offers  a  reflective  strategy  that  can  be  used  in 
many  areas  where  individuals’  motivation  and  goal-setting 
matter  for  the  success  of  the  service,  such  as  education, 
health,  sustainability,  and  finance.  For  example,  our  work 
suggests  that  Fitbit’s  current  Personal  Trainer  feature  may 
become  more  effective  if  it  guides  people  to  write  down 
why tracking daily steps matters to them, and displays these 
motivations as a reminder. Asking students in a MOOC or 
users  of  Mint,  a  personal  finance  management  app,  to 
reflect  on  their  goals  and  then  choose  how  they  create  the 
curriculum or savings plan may improve their motivation to 
learn and finish the program. Our work suggests that, rather 
than lists of pre-defined, generic goals that users can choose 
from, services should offer a space for individuals to write 
down  the  unique  significance  that  achieving  a  chosen  goal 
would have for them. Personal informatics can also benefit 
from  the  reflective  strategy.  Previous  research  has  shown 
that  reflecting  on  collected  data  is  just  as  important  as 
collecting data itself for the success of personal informatics 
tools  [33].  “Why”  questions  can  be  used  to  improve 
people’s  adherence  to  data  collection  or  to  elicit  deeper 
understanding of their collected data. 

Modeling human practices as a design approach 
Modeling  human  behaviors  is  a  common  way  of  inspiring 
nascent  computing  applications,  as  with  the  early  desktop 
metaphor  for  GUI  and  robots  [31].  It  is  less  common  for 

752

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

more  mature  computing  applications  such  as  apps  and 
websites.  Designers  for  these  applications  study  human 
practices to create tools that support those practices, but not 
to use them as design inspiration. This work suggests that, 
even  for  technology  with  well-established  design  patterns, 
human practices can serve as the bases of new and effective 
design interventions. 

FUTURE WORK 
Our work points to many open spaces for future research. In 
our  study,  the  reflective  strategy  was  used  at  the  initial 
goal-setting  and  planning  stage.  However,  there  are  many 
other points of intervention in service, such as while people 
are  carrying  out  their  plans,  or  when  they  become 
disengaged and lose motivation. Future work could explore 
how reflective questions can improve these different stages 
of  service.  In  our  work,  we  explored  motivation  and 
behavior change as the main service outcomes to improve. 
Future  research  can  explore  whether  and  how  reflective 
questions can be used to improve other outcomes, tackling 
issues such as anchoring biases or the “filter bubble” effect 
[35].  In  addition,  with  advancement  in  natural  language 
understanding,  further  work  can  explore  how  interactive 
dialogues  such  as  ELIZA  [64],  rather  than  self-guided 
processes, can be used to elicit deep reflection in users. 

CONCLUSION 
Personalization  is  a  pervasive,  integral  part  of  people’s 
lives, with an ever-growing influence on the decisions that 
people  make  and  the  content  and  services  that  people 
access.  We  envision  personalization  as  a 
form  of 
empowerment, helping people realize what matters to them 
and giving them the agency to prioritize it. In this paper, we 
have presented a reflective personalization strategy with the 
goal  of  helping  people  better  personalize  services 
themselves  through  reflection.  We  interviewed  human 
health 
such 
service  providers  as  one  model  of 
personalization  and  adapted  their  strategies  to  technology-
based services. To evaluate the reflective strategy, we built 
Fitbit  Plan,  where  Fitbit  users  could  set  up  a  personalized 
two-week  plan  to  gradually  increase  their  daily  steps.  The 
two-week  field  experiment  suggests  that  the  reflective 
strategy  motivated  users  to  increase  their  daily  steps, 
regardless  of  who  (user  or  system)  personalized  the  plan. 
These results suggest that we may benefit from broadening 
the  focus  and  implementation  of  personalization.  We  hope 
this  study  will  influence  the  ways  in  which  we  design 
personalized environments, so that people are not treated as 
mere recipients of services, but rather as active participants 
who can best realize their own needs, goals, and problems, 
and have the power to create their own solutions.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
This  research  was  supported  by  NSF  grants  0624275  and 
709077  and  the  first  author’s  KwanJeong  Lee  Jong  Hwan 
Scholarship  and  Siebel  Scholarship.  The  second  author 
conducted  this  research  while  he  was  at  CMU.  We  thank 
Leila  Takayama  and  John  Zimmerman  for  their  comments 
on this work. 

SESSION: PERSUASIVE AND PERSONAL

REFERENCES 
1.  Akerlof, G. A., & Kranton, R. (2010). Identity 
economics. The Economists' Voice, 7(2). 

2.  Balabanovic, M. & Shoham, Y. (1997). Fab: content-

based, collaborative recommendation. Commun. ACM 
40, 66-72. 

3.  Baumer, E. P., Khovanskaya, V., Matthews, M., …. & 

Gay, G. K. (2014). Reviewing Reflection: On the Use of 
Reflection in Interactive System Design. In Proc. of 
DIS’14, 93-102. 

4.  Berkovsky, S., Freyne, J., & Oinas-Kukkonen, H. 

(2012). Influencing individually: Fusing persuasion and 
personalization. ACM TiiS. 2(2), 9-16. 

5.  Blom, J. & Monk, A. F. (2003). Theory of 

personalization of appearance: Why users personalize 
their PCs and mobile phones. Human-Computer 
Interaction, 18(3), 193-228. 

6.  Brusilovsky, P., Kobsa, A., & Nejdl, W. (2007). The 

adaptive web: Methods and strategies of web 
personalization. (Vol. 4321) Springer Science & 
Business Media. 

7.  Carr, N. (2014). The glass cage: automation and us. 

WW Norton & Company. 

8.  Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (2000). Autonomy and 
self-regulation. Psychological Inquiry, 11, 284–290. 

9.  Consolvo, S., Klasnja, P., McDonald, D. W.,... & 
Landay, J. A. (2008). Flowers or a robot army?: 
Encouraging awareness & activity with personal, mobile 
displays. In Proc. of Ubicomp’10, 54-63. 

10. Dourish, P. (1997). Accounting for system behaviour: 
Representation, reflection and resourceful action. 
Computers and Design in Context, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, MA, USA, 145-170. 

11. “Facebook apologizes for highlighting painful memories 
with ‘Year in Review’ feature” on CBC news blogs, 
http://www.cbc.ca/newsblogs/yourcommunity/2014/12/f
acebook-apologizes-for-highlighting-painful-memories-
with-year-in-review-feature.html, retrieved in July, 
2015. 

12. Fan, C., Forlizzi, J., & Dey, A. K. (2012). A spark of 
activity: Exploring informative art as visualization for 
physical activity. In Proc. of Ubicomp’12, 81-84. 

13. Fan, H., & Poole, M. S. (2006). What is 

personalization? Perspectives on the design and 
implementation of personalization in information 
systems. Journal of Org. Computing and Electronic 
Commerce, 16(3-4), 179-202. 

14. Fitbit. http://www.fitbit.com 

15. Fischer, G., Giaccardi, E., Ye, Y., Sutcliffe, A.G. & 
Mehandjiev, N. (2004) Meta-design: a manifesto for 
end- user development. Commun. ACM, 47, 33–37. 

16. Flavell, J. H. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive 

monitoring: A new area of cognitive–developmental 
inquiry. American psychologist, 34(10), 906-911. 

753

17. Fujita, K., & Han, A. (2009). Moving beyond 

deliberative control of impulses: The effect of construal 
levels on evaluative associations in self-control 
conflicts. Psychological Science, 20, 799-804. 

18. Hallnäs, L., & Redström, J. (2001). Slow technology–
designing for reflection. Personal and ubiquitous 
computing, 5(3), 201-212. 

19. Halko, S., & Kientz, J. A. (2010). Personality and 

persuasive technology: an exploratory study on health-
promoting mobile applications. In Proc. of 
Persuasive’10, 150-161. 

20. Hsieh, G., Munson, S. A., Kaptein, M. C., … & Nov, O. 
(2014). Personalizing behavior change technologies. In 
Proc. of CHI'14 Extended Abstracts, 107-110. 

21. Isaacs, E., Konrad, A., Walendowski, A.,… & 

Whittaker, S. (2013). Echoes from the past: how 
technology mediated reflection improves well-being. In 
Proc. of CHI’13, 1071-1080. 

22. Iwane, M., Arita, M.,.,…& Nishio, I. (2000). Walking 
10,000 steps/day or more reduces blood pressure and 
sympathetic nerve activity in mild essential 
hypertension. Hypertension research: official journal of 
the Japanese Society of Hypertension, 23(6), 573-580. 

23. Iyengar, S. S., & Lepper, M. R. (2000). When choice is 

demotivating: Can one desire too much of a good 
thing?. Journal of personality and social psychology, 
79(6), 995-1006. 

24. Jensen, G. M., Gwyer, J., Shepard, K. F., & Hack, L. M. 
(2000). Expert practice in physical therapy. Physical 
Therapy, 80(1), 28-43. 

25. Kahneman, D. (2003). Maps of bounded rationality: 
Psychology for behavioral economics. The American 
Economic Review, 93(5), 1449-1475. 

26. Kaptein, M., Ruyter, B. D., Markopoulos, P., & Aarts, 
E. (2012). Adaptive persuasive systems: A study of 
tailored persuasive text messages to reduce snacking. 
ACM TiiS, 2(2), 10-34. 

27. Komiak, S. Y., & Benbasat, I. (2006). The effects of 

personalization and familiarity on trust and adoption of 
recommendation agents. Mis Quarterly, 941-960. 

28. Kriplean, T., Toomim, M., Morgan, J., Borning, A., & 
Ko, A. (2012). Is this what you meant?: promoting 
listening on the web with reflect. In Proc. of CHI’12, 
1559-1568. 

29. Lacroix, J., Saini, P., & Goris, A. (2009). Understanding 

user cognitions to guide the tailoring of persuasive 
technology-based physical activity interventions. In 
Proc. of Persuasive’09, 9. 

30. Lee, M. K., Forlizzi, J., Kiesler, S., … & Savetsila, S. 
(2012). Personalization in HRI: A longitudinal field 
experiment. In Proc. of HRI’12, 319-326. 

31. Lee, M. K., Forlizzi, J., …& Kiesler, S. (2009). The 

snackbot: documenting the design of a robot for long-
term human-robot interaction. In Proc. of HRI’09, 7-14. 

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

32. Lee, M. K., Kusbit, D., Metsky, E., & Dabbish, L. 
(2015). Working with machines: The impact of 
algorithmic and data-driven management on human 
workers. In Proc. of CHI’15, 1603-1612. 

33. Li, I., Dey, A.K., & Forlizzi, J. (2010). A stage-based 
model of personal informatics systems. In Proc. of 
CHI’10, 557-566. 

48. Samuelson, W., & Zeckhauser, R. (1988). Status quo 

bias in decision making. Journal of risk and uncertainty, 
1(1), 7-59. 

49. Sanches, P., Höök, K., Vaara, E., ... & Sjölinder, M. 
(2010). Mind the body!: Designing a mobile stress 
management application encouraging personal 
reflection. In Proc. of DIS’10, 47-56. 

34. Liang, T-P., Lai, H-J., & Ku, Y-C. (2006). Personalized 

50. Schon, D. A. (1982). The Reflective Practitioner.  

content recommendation and user satisfaction: 
Theoretical synthesis and empirical findings. Journal of 
Management of Information Systems, 23(3), 45-70.  

35. Liao, Q. V., & Fu, W. T. (2014). Can you hear me 

now?: Mitigating the echo chamber effect by source 
position indicators. In Proc. of CSCW’14, 184-196. 

36. Lin, J. J., Mamykina, L., … & Strub, H. B. (2006). 
Fish’n’Steps: Encouraging physical activity with an 
interactive computer game. In Proc. of Ubicomp’06. 

37. Locke, E. A., & Latham, G. P. (2002). Building a 
practically useful theory of goal setting and task 
motivation: A 35-year odyssey. American psychologist, 
57(9), 705-717. 

38. Mamykina, L., Mynatt, E., Davidson, P., & Greenblatt, 

D. (2008). MAHI: Investigation of social scaffolding for 
reflective thinking in diabetes management. In Proc. of 
CHI’08, 477-486. 

39. Maslow, A. H. (1943). A theory of human motivation. 

Psychological review, 50(4), 370-396. 

40. Mayor-Schonberger, V., & Cukier, K. (2013). Big Data: 
A Revolution That Will Transform How We Live, Work, 
and Think. Eamon Dolan / Houghton Mifflin. 

41. Milkman, K. L., Chugh, D., & Bazerman, M. H. (2009). 
How can decision making be improved?. Perspectives 
on Psychological Science, 4(4), 379-383. 

42. Miyake, N. (2007). Computer supported collaborative 
learning. The SAGE handbook of e-learning research, 
248-265. 

43. Munson, S. A., & Consolvo, S. (2012). Exploring goal-

setting, rewards, self-monitoring, and sharing to 
motivate physical activity. In Proc. of 
PervasiveHealth’12, 25-32. 

44. Pariser, E. (2011). The filter bubble: How the new 

personalized web is changing what we read and how we 
think. NY, USA: Penguin Group. 

45. Richard, M., Christina, M. F., Deborah, L. S., … & 

Kennon, M. S. (1997). Intrinsic motivation and exercise 
adherence. Int J Sport Psychology, 28, 335-354. 

46. Riquelme, H. (2001). Do consumers know what they 

want? Journal of Consumer Marketing, 18(5), 437-448. 

47. Saari, T. & Turpeinen, M. (2004). Towards 

psychological customization of information for 
individuals and social groups. In Designing 
Personalized User Experiences in eCommerce , 19-37.  

51. Sengers, P., Boehner, K., David, S., & Kaye, J. J. 

(2005). Reflective design. In Proc. of the 4th decennial 
conference on Critical computing: between sense and 
sensibility, 49-58. 

52. Sheldon, K. M. (2014). Becoming Oneself: The central 
role of self-concordant goal selection. Personality and 
Social Psychology Review, 349-365. 

53. Simonson, I. (2005). Determinants of customers’ 

responses to customized offers: Conceptual framework 
and research propositions. Journal of Marketing, 32-45. 

54. Spalding, E., Wilson, A., & Mewborn, D. (2002). 
Demystifying reflection: A study of pedagogical 
strategies that encourage reflective journal writing. The 
Teachers College Record, 104(7), 1393-1421. 

55. Strack, F., & Mussweiler, T. (1997). Explaining the 
enigmatic anchoring effect: Mechanisms of selective 
accessibility. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 73(3), 437-446. 

56. Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. M. (1990). Basics of 

qualitative research: grounded theory procedures and 
techniques. 

57. Sundre, D. L., & Moore, D. L. (2002). The Student 
Opinion Scale: A measure of examinee motivation. 
Assessment Update, 14(1), 8-9. 

58. Sunstein, C. R. (2009). Republic.com 2.0.  

59. Teevan, J., Dumais, S., & Horvitz, E. (2010). Potential 

for personalization. ACM TOCHI, 17(1), 1-31. 

60. Thieme, A., Comber, R., Miebach, J., … & Olivier, P. 

(2012). We've bin watching you: Designing for 
reflection and social persuasion to promote sustainable 
lifestyles. In Proc. of CHI’12, 2337-2346. 

61. Trope, Y. & Liberman, N. (2010). Construal-level 

theory of psychological distance. Psychological Review, 
440-463. 

62. Tuzhilin, A. (2009). Personalization: The state of the art 
and future directions. In Admavicius, G. & Gupta, A. 
(Eds.) Business Computing (pp. 3-43). 

63. Wasinger, R., Wallbank, J., Pizzato, L., … & Kruger, A. 
(2013). Scrutable user models and personalised item 
recommendation in mobile lifestyle applications. In 
User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization, 77–88.  

64. Weizenbaum, J. (1966). ELIZA—a computer program 
for the study of natural language communication 
between man and machine. Comm. of the ACM, 36-45.

754

 
