Quantiﬁed Self Meets Social Media: Sharing of Weight
Updates on Twitter

Yafei Wang
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park
PA 16802, USA
yxw184@ist.psu.edu

Ingmar Weber and Prasenjit Mitra
Qatar Computing Research Institute, HBKU
Tornado Tower, P.O. 5825 Doha, Qatar
{iweber,pmitra}@qf.org.qa

ABSTRACT
An increasing number of people use wearables and other
smart devices to quantify various health conditions, ranging
from sleep patterns, to body weight, to heart rates. Of these
“Quantiﬁed Selfs” many choose to openly share their data via
online social networks such as Twitter and Facebook. In this
study, we use data for users who have chosen to connect their
smart scales to Twitter, providing both a reliable time series
of their body weight, as well as insights into their social sur-
roundings and general online behavior. Concretely, we look
at which social media features are predictive of physical sta-
tus, such as body weight at the individual level, and activity
patterns at the population level. We show that it is possi-
ble to predict an individual’s weight using their online social
behaviors, such as their self-description and tweets. Weekly
and monthly patterns of quantiﬁed-self behaviors are also
discovered. These ﬁndings could contribute to building mod-
els to monitor public health and to have more customized
personal training interventions.

While there are many studies using either quantiﬁed self
or social media data in isolation, this is one of the few that
combines the two data sources and, to the best of our knowl-
edge, the only one that uses public data.

CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in
HCI; Empirical studies in collaborative and social
computing; •Applied computing → Sociology;

Keywords
Quantiﬁed Self; Twitter; Smart Scales

1.

INTRODUCTION

During the last couple of years, the number of users who
use “Quantiﬁed Self” (QS) health tracking devices has con-
tinuously increased 1. A survey of 1,262 U.S. adult con-

1http://nuviun.com/digital-health/quantiﬁed-self

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
DigitalHealth ’16 April 11–13, 2016, Montreal, Canada
c(cid:13) 2016 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-4224-7/16/04. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2896338.2896363

sumers conducted in December 2014 found that 31% use a
QS tool to track their health and ﬁtness.2 In lockstep with
this proliferation of QS tools, research output on all related
aspects has also seen a dramatic increase. Google Scholar
lists 74 publications with “Quantiﬁed Self” in the title for all
years up to and including 2013.3 However, since 2014 alone,
already 123 publications matching this criteria have been
indexed.4 Most of this research, however, looks at QS data
in isolation, separately from other data one might obtain for
a user.

In this paper, we present results from an attempt to com-
bine QS data with social media data. This link between
two data sources is made possible as more and more users
publicly share the QS data they generate. For our study, we
use data from users who opted in to connect their internet-
enabled Withings Smart Body Analyzer5 to their Twitter
account. Figure 1 shows an anonymised example tweet. We
analyze data for 897 Twitter users who (i) not only have
auto-generated ﬁtness tweets from Withings, and apps such
as Fitbit, or Nike, but (ii) also have “normal” tweets not
generated by ﬁtness apps.

Figure 1: An anonymised example of a self-
quantiﬁed English tweet generated by Withings’
smart scale.

We are interested to see if a user’s weight can be inferred
from his or her general social media behavior on Twitter. Do
users with a larger body weight somehow tweet diﬀerently?
If a link can be found, then this opens up new opportunities
as it hints at the actual health information using social me-
dia data. In particular, we envision that social media could
be used as one building block, together with QS data and
electronic health records, to devise more personalized, holis-
tic interventions that take a user’s lifestyle into account [7].

2http://quantiﬁedself.com/docs/RocketFuel Quantiﬁed
Self Research.pdf
3https://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=intitle\
%3A”quantiﬁed+self”&as yhi=2013.
Jan 8, 2016.
4https://scholar.google.com/scholar?q=intitle\
%3A”quantiﬁed+self”&as ylo=2014.
Jan 8, 2016.
5http://www2.withings.com/us/en/products/
smart-body-analyzer

Last accessed on

Last accessed on

93For example, a doctor could be provided with information
about the personality of the individual from their tweets or
the inﬂuences on the individual from their social circles that
need to be taken into account (and, in some cases, overcome)
while understanding and prescribing diet and exercise inter-
ventions.

Combining QS data and social media data also helps to
overcome one frequent shortcoming of health-related studies:
a lack of individual-level ground truth. While county-level
health statistics, such as obesity rates, are readily available,
it is much harder to obtain a set of Twitter users with a
known weight, ideally also traceable over time. Despite the
obvious limitations due to selection bias, users who link their
QS data to their public social media account still provide a
valuable data set.

At the same time, there are technical challenges that need
to be addressed for a successful data fusion. Social me-
dia data is famously noisy due to internet lingo, spam and
bots, and data incompleteness resulting from API limita-
tions. The QS data also has its share of issues as users
share their scale with friends6 or they might weigh them-
selves both before and after eating a large meal or going to
the rest room. The combined data creates additional chal-
lenges due to its heterogenous nature: a textual stream (and
more) from normal tweets, and a time series of weight data
from QS tweets. We help address some of these issues by
describing a method to remove implausible weigh-in data
points.

Apart from technical challenges, the ethical challenges are
at least as daunting. Though legally “public” data, tweets
still often contain information that many would consider
“private”. A tweeter expects his tweets to be viewed by his
followers and the general public and not to be used and high-
lighted by data scientists around the world. Such concerns
are ampliﬁed in the domain of medical data.

We believe that tackling these challenges is well worth the
eﬀort, especially as our initial results are promising. Con-
cretely, we ﬁnd that social media data can predict a user’s
average weight with an R-squared around .25. We also ﬁnd
that the QS data collected through the Twitter stream is
valuable by itself for population-level health analysis. For
example, the result lets us paint a picture of weight tran-
sition across the year – yes, it goes up over Christmas and
New Year – and of “dieting morale” across the week – users
weigh themselves most often on weekends, which, ironically,
is when they are least likely to do something about their
weight. Given that we would not have been able to collect
this data7 otherwise, this is a further advantage of looking
at the intersection between QS and social media.

2. RELATED WORK

To the best of our knowledge, there is very little prior
work that combines social media and QS data at the level of
the individual. The vision described by Estrin [6] deﬁnitely
includes a combination of data sources but no study on such
data seems to have been performed to date. Vickey and
Breslin [12] report a system-level study of how ﬁtness app
data is shared on Twitter, but they do not include a user-

6We even observed an instance where, apparently, the
weight of a cat was recorded.
7One of our data source, Topsy, is no longer supported since
Dec. 2015.

level study that links a user’s normal Twitter data with their
ﬁtness data. The StudentLife Project8 [14] uses a mobile
phone app to collect detailed activity data, which is linked
to academic performance. This data also includes Facebook
proﬁles, though these are not part of the publicly shared
data set.

Studies related to obesity and weight loss using social me-
dia typically take a population-level, public health approach.
Culotta [5] used geo-tagged tweets, and Abbar, et al., [1]
used food-related tweets to predict geographical diﬀerences
in obesity and diabetes. Though including “normal life”, like
food-related tweets, in their analysis, they use county-level
data as “ground truth” for obesity. By using quantiﬁed self
data, we can obtain weight-related information at the indi-
vidual level.

A body of work also studies specialized social media, such
as online weight loss forums [9]. Particular attention has
been given to predicting weight loss from interactions in
the social network. Chomutare, et al., [4] showed that high
levels of activity in online obesity communities and being
connected to several disparate sub-communities were both
predictive of weight loss. They observed that the network
structure properties were more useful in predicting weight
loss than the biographical information associated with the
users. Li, et al., [8] take this a step further by studying the
problem of recommending a “good” friend within the context
of a weight-loss app. Brindal, et al., [3] showed that the in-
clusion of a social networking platform did not have additive
eﬀects with respect to weight loss or retention. However,
these inclusions resulted in patients using their weight loss
system for a longer duration. However, in their experiments,
greater use of a weight tracker tool resulted in greater loss.
Though our work only looks at the combination of social me-
dia and QS for data collection, their work provides evidence
for beneﬁts for health interventions as well.

3. DATA COLLECTION

To collect our data, we use the Twitter Streaming API9
for three weeks in Oct 2015 collecting tweets containing key-
words, “lb” or “kg”. Note that this broad pattern captures
data both weight-related QS tweets and other tweets in sev-
eral languages. We also use the Topsy API10 to gather all ob-
tainable historical tweets containing these keywords. These
tweets were then ﬁltered such that only tweets generated by
“WiTwit” were kept.11 For each unique user who generated
these tweets, we obtained (i) (up to) 3,200 of their most re-
cent tweets, (ii) their self-generated proﬁle known as “bio”,
(iii) the lists of their friends and followers, and (iv) the bios
of their friends and followers.

A large fraction of users in our dataset only tweeted their
weight or other automatic ﬁtness tweets. These specially
created accounts, potentially as a sort of personal ﬁtness
log, were not of interest for us as, apart from a time series of
weigh-ins, there was no other social media data to better un-
derstand the user. We therefore imposed an additional ﬁlter
by requiring (i) each user to have at least 10 “normal” tweets

8http://studentlife.cs.dartmouth.edu/
9https://dev.twitter.com/streaming/overview
10https://otter.topsy.com/search.json?q=kg+lb, no longer
supported.
11“WiTwit” is the “source” ﬁeld used in Tweets generated by
WiThings’ smart scale.

94Type
Patterns
Original Weight Loss WiTwit
Other Weight Loss

Fitness

Lose It!, SimpleWeight
RunKeeper, Fitbit, Nike
Runmeter, Runtastic, Nike+ GPS,
iSmoothRun

Table 1: List of patterns identifying automatic ﬁt-
ness tweets in the “source” ﬁeld of a tweet’s JSON
ﬁle.
not automatically generated by one of WiTwit, or FitBit 12.
and (ii) having at least ten weigh-in tweets automatically
generated by WiTwit.

Additionally, we wanted to make sure that users, at least
potentially, have social interactions on Twitter. A number
of audience and “normal” tweets are required for capturing
potention social interactions. So, we selected users with at
least 50 friends and followers, for individual analysis. The
cutoﬀ of 50 was chosen based on manual inspection. For ex-
ample, a speciﬁc user with 60 friends and 41 followers, just
below the cutoﬀ, only published 269 tweets, including only
30 normal ones. Another user with 657 friends and 55 fol-
lowers, just above the cutoﬀ, published 837 tweets, including
746 normal ones. In total, we excluded 467 users, and with
430 users remaining after ﬁltering for social interactions.

3.1 Identiﬁcation of Fitness Tweets Generated

by Fitness Apps

A large fraction of users in our data set had additional
automatically-generated ﬁtness tweets, apart from the ones
from Withings. We collected these ﬁtness tweets separately
as they hold additional, valuable QS information. An exam-
ple tweet could be like “Just complete a 3.33 miles Run.”. In
order to identify these tweets, we check the source ﬁeld of
each individual tweet. The source ﬁeld indicates the tool
used to post the Tweet. For auto-generated tweets, the
source ﬁeld provides the name and the URL of the corre-
sponding app, such as WiTwit, Runkeeper, or Fitbit. Ta-
ble 1 shows the patterns of automatic ﬁtness tweets we have
used in this paper. 300 out of 897 users in our dataset have
at least one automatic ﬁtness tweet.

4. LINKING SOCIAL MEDIA BEHAVIOR
AND QUANTIFIED-SELF DATA AT THE
INDIVIDUAL LEVEL

In this section, we utilize users’ online social activities
to predict their body weight. Their weight is measured by
Withing scales and we assign each person the average of all of
their recorded weigh-ins as their reference weight. Two types
of Twitter data sources are utilized to extract features to
predict users’ weights: (i) their self-description (also known
as bio) and (ii) their tweets. All non-English content was
translated to English using Google’s machine translation 13.
Upon inspection of the data, we found that some users
share their Withing scales with their family members. To
detect and clean such weigh-in series generated by multi-
ple people, we apply a formula for “plausible weight tran-
for a given user, a weight transition from weight
sitions”:

12The full list of apps considered for this is MyFitnessPal,
Fitbit, Withings, Lose It! and Nike.
13https://translate.google.com

Feature Name
Bio LIWC ppron
Bio LIWC aﬀect
Bio LIWC pronoun
Tweet LIWC feel
Bio LIWC social
Tweet LIWC ingest
Bio LIWC present
Bio LIWC auxverb
Bio LIWC verb
Tweet LIWC shehe
Bio LIWC incl
Bio LIWC cogmech
Bio LIWC article
Bio LIWC conj
Tweet LIWC bio

Coef. Feature
91.44 Tweet LIWC auxverb
90.97 Tweet LIWC verb
90.71 Tweet LIWC social
90.05 Tweet LIWC number
89.57 Tweet LIWC present
86.24 Tweet LIWC past
79.47 Tweet LIWC article
76.12 Tweet LIWC conj
76.09 Tweet LIWC adverb
75.62 Tweet LIWC excl
72.23 Tweet LIWC funct
71.20 Tweet LIWC insight
69.83 Tweet LIWC tentat
66.49 Tweet LIWC you
65.97 Tweet LIWC discrep

Coef.
-20.01
-19.55
-18.10
-16.82
-16.40
-15.98
-15.56
-15.50
-15.26
-15.00
-14.64
-13.91
-13.48
-11.00
-10.40

Table 2: A Support Vector Machine model with lin-
ear kernel for predicting a person’s average weight
using their tweets and self-description. The top-15
features for each direction are shown here.

w(i) to w(i+1) [in pounds] between days d(i) and d(i+1) is
“plausible” if |w(i)−w(i+1)| ≤ 4+|d(i)−d(i+1)|. In words,
we allow for up to 4lb of weight ﬂuctuation within one day
and 1lb for each day passed. Note that 1lb of body fat is
roughly equivalent to 3,500kcal. Though larger ﬂuctuations
are possible, especially due to excessively storing or losing
of liquid, we decided to err on the side of caution, rather
than including too much erroneous data. Users with more
than three plausibility violations were excluded. Some users
reported suspiciously low or high some weights such as 12
lbs or 400 lbs. Users whose average weight is either smaller
than 100 lbs or larger than 300 are treated as outliers and
excluded from our analysis. As a point of reference, the av-
erage of the individual average weights was 178.4lb. Note
that this is very close to the 2012 average weight of adults
in North America of 177.9lb14, indicating that our data may
not be as odd and biased as one may imagine. After apply-
ing the data ﬁltering explained above, we use the remaining
391 users to build a prediction model.

In order to capture and summarize a user’s social media
content, we utilize two existing dictionaries that have un-
dergone psychometric validation. The ﬁrst is the Linguistic
Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) dictionary15 [10] with 64
categories, and the second is the PERMA16 dictionary [11]
with ten categories. Both dictionaries map terms to a set of
categories such as “social”, “health” and “body” in the case of
LIWC [10], or “positive emotion”, “engagement” and “mean-
ing” in the case of PERMA. For example, PERMA maps the
term “distract” to “negative emotion”; and LIWC maps the
term “brother” to “social”. We applied this mapping both
to a user’s normal tweets17 and their bio. For boosting the
model performance, we also add Bag-of-Word features.

In order to quantify and interpret the eﬀects of diﬀerent

14https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Human body weight#By
region
15We use the LIWC2007 dictionary in this paper.
16PERMA is a mnemonic for Positive emotion, Engagement,
Relationships, Meaning, and Achievement — the ﬁve ele-
ments of well-being.
17Automatically generated ﬁtness tweets and weigh-in tweets
are excluded.

95Constant Baseline
Language Split
Gaussian Process

R
-0.14
0.23
0.50
Gaussian Process + BoW 0.55
0.34
0.07
0.48
Gaussian Process + BoW 0.55
0.34

SVM (Linear Kernel)
Language Split
Gaussian Process

SVM (Linear Kernel)

MAE RMSE
34.67
27.89
30.06
23.73
29.87
23.67
29.04
23.00
33.31
26.65
62.32
40.99
30.26
23.84
28.99
22.96
33.47
26.81

Tweet
Only

Tweet
+
Bio

Table 3: Results of predicting a person’s average
weight (in lb) using social media information.

indicators, we ﬁt a support vector machine model with a
linear kernel to predict the weight of an individual. All
the social activity features (except their actual weight) have
been linear max-min scaled to [0,1]. The top 15 indicators
of the support vector machine model with linear kernel for
each direction are shown in Table 2.

Given the model in Table 2, it is worth looking at which
Twitter features are most predictive of a person’s weight.
People with higher actual weight mentioned more ingest
words (Tweet LIWC ingest), such as food, dish, and eat,
in their self description. This observation might suggest
that people who publicly express their love for food have
a higher probability to be overweight.
In addition, users
with a lower weight use more words regarding biological
process, (Tweet LIWC bio), such as “eat”, or “body”, than
their heavier counterparts. Previous research shows that
successful weight management is linked to health awareness
18, which matches our ﬁndings. We observed a number of
other top indicators (such as for the categories social, aﬀect
or feel.), but these are admittedly hard to interpret. We
hope that our observations help other researchers to form
hypotheses around these to test in more depth.

Table 3 shows the weight prediction performance. We
evaluate the model performance using three measures: cor-
relation coeﬃcient (R), Mean Absolute Error (MAE) and
Root Mean Squared Error (RMSE). The MAE represents
an average of the absolute errors; and the RMSE shows the
standard deviation of errors. They are evaluated for 391
users using 10-fold cross validation. Speciﬁcally, the base-
line model performance is without Tweet and Bio features;
and the language split model is built by splitting the data
by languages (English versus Japanese).

Initially, using only information from normal tweets, the
Gaussian Process model explains around 25% of the vari-
ance in average weight. Thus, there may be a link between
QS data and social media data that is worth exploring. Fur-
thermore, if we add the self-description data of the users, the
performance (Table 3) drops a little.

5. USING QUANTIFIED SELF DATA AT THE

POPULATION LEVEL

So far, all of our analysis has linked QS and social media
data at the individual level. Here, we look at population-
level patterns that can be obtained by using the QS weight
information obtained through Twitter. Speciﬁcally, we ex-
plore the patterns of quantiﬁed-self data across days-of-weeks
or months-of-years on a larger dataset, including 897 users.
18http://www.health.harvard.edu/exercise-and-ﬁtness/
lose-weight-and-keep-it-oﬀ

Withings
weigh-ins
Fitness
tweets
e “bmi”
l
g
o
o
G

“Weight
loss”
“diet”

Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri

54k

54k

54k

53k

47k

Sat

63k

Sun

52k

9.4k

9.6k

9.3k

9.2k

8.9k

8.8k

9.0k

27.1

28.5

28.2

27.8

25.0

21.6

22.8

36.1

92.0

35.9

34.8

33.4

31.5

31.5

34.1

90.5

87.7

85.0

78.5

78.3

86.9

Table 4: Quantiﬁed-Self and Google search behavior
on diﬀerent weekdays.

Figure 2: Weight changes for diﬀerent months, rel-
ative to a user’s mean weight.

5.1 Trends in QS Behavior Across Days-of-Week
Table 4 reports the frequency of automatically generated
weigh-in and ﬁtness tweets in our dataset. For comparison,
we also show information for Google search volumes19 for the
three queries “BMI”, “weight loss” and “diet”, summarized for
days-of-the-week from September 2015 to November 2015.

There are clear weekly patterns detectable for both the
QS and the Google Trends data. Put simply, users are most
aware of their weight on Saturdays with, by far, the largest
number of weigh-ins. However, this is also the day where
they are least likely to “take action” by (i) generating ﬁt-
ness tweets, or (ii) searching for diet-related information.
By contrast, such actions seems to be most likely on Mon-
days. Consistent observations were made by Weber and
Achananuparp [15] who observed that the number of users
logging their meals with MyFitnessPal is highest (lowest) on
Mondays (Saturdays). Of those users that log their meals,
the fraction consuming more than their self-set calorie goals
is also lowest (highest) on Mondays (Saturdays). Based on
this observation, Saturday is everyone’s “weigh-in day” but
not “ﬁtness day”.

5.2 Trends in QS Behavior Across Months-of-

Year

In this subsection, we look at actual weight changes across
a year. For each person, we compare her average weight
within a given month to her global average weight. For
each month, these weight changes are then averaged across
all users. Mean and error bar of weight changes for diﬀerent
months are shown in Figure 2. We see that users gain weight
during winter months, from a low in October to a high in
January, before starting to lose weight again. Though the
observed jump of just under 1lb during the holiday seasons
might appear lower than intuition would suggest, this value

19https://www.google.com/trends/explore

-1.0-0.50.00.51.0JanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctNovDecMonthWeight Difference (lbs)96cial media data and very accurate, longitudinal quantiﬁed
self data has great potential to improve personalized health
care.

8. REFERENCES
[1] S. Abbar, Y. Mejova, and I. Weber. You tweet what

you eat: Studying food consumption through twitter.
In CHI, pages 3197–3206, 2015.

[2] C. Banea, R. Mihalcea, J. Wiebe, and S. Hassan.
Multilingual subjectivity analysis using machine
translation. In EMNLP, pages 127–135, 2008.
[3] E. Brindal, J. Freyne, I. Saunders, S. Berkovsky,

G. Smith, and M. Noakes. Features predicting weight
loss in overweight or obese participants in a web-based
intervention: randomized trial. J. Med. Internet Res.,
14(6):e173, 2012.

[4] T. Chomutare, A. Xu, and M. Iyengar. Social network
analysis to delineate interaction patterns that predict
weight loss performance. In CBMS, pages 271–276,
2014.

[5] A. Culotta. Estimating county health statistics with

twitter. In CHI, pages 1335–1344, 2014.

[6] D. Estrin. Small data, where n = me. CACM,

57(4):32–34, 2014.

[7] H. Haddadi, F. Oﬂi, Y. Mejova, I. Weber, and

J. Srivastava. 360-degree quantiﬁed self. In ICHI,
pages 587–592, 2015.

[8] A. Li, E. W. Ngai, and J. Chai. Friend

recommendation for healthy weight in social networks:
A novel approach to weight loss. Industrial
Management & Data Systems, 115(7):1251–1268, 2015.

[9] V. Li, D. W. McDonald, E. V. Eikey, J. Sweeney,
J. Escajeda, G. Dubey, K. Riley, E. S. Poole, and
E. B. Hekler. Losing it online: Characterizing
participation in an online weight loss community. In
GROUP, pages 35–45, 2014.

[10] J. Pennebaker, J. Francis, and R. Booth. Linguistic

inquiry and word count: Liwc 2001, 2007.
http://homepage.psy.utexas.edu/homepage/faculty/
pennebaker/reprints/liwc2007 operatormanual.pdf.

[11] M. Seligman. Flourish: A Visionary New

Understanding of Happiness and Well-being. Atria
Books, 2012.

[12] T. A. Vickey and J. G. Breslin. A study on twitter
usage for ﬁtness self-reporting via mobile apps. In
AAAI-SS, 2012.

[13] C. Vorland. Holidays & weight gain: what the science

suggests, 2011. http://nutsci.org/2011/11/22/
holidays-weight-gain-what-the-science-suggests/.

[14] R. Wang, F. Chen, Z. Chen, T. Li, G. Harari,

S. Tignor, X. Zhou, D. Ben-Zeev, and A. T. Campbell.
Studentlife: Assessing mental health, academic
performance and behavioral trends of college students
using smartphones. In UbiComp, pages 3–14, 2014.

[15] I. Weber and A. P. Achananuparp. Insights from

machine-learned diet success prediction. In PSB, pages
540–551, 2016.

[16] I. Weber and Y. Mejova. Crowdsourcing health labels:
Inferring body weight from proﬁle pictures. 2016.

Figure 3: Google Trends search scores for diﬀerent
months from 2005 to 2015.

is perfectly in line with the results of a meta analysis of
weight gain over Christmas [13].20

Additionally, we wanted to see if there is a link between
QS data and topical interest as observed through Google
Trends. Figure 3 presents the mean and the error bar of
Google search scores aggregated by month from 2005 to
2015. For all three of our search terms, search activity is
highest in January, possibly due to New Year’s resolutions.
Overall, the search volume changes more abruptly from De-
cember to January than the actual weight (see Figure 2). So
whereas users slowly put on pounds from October to Jan-
uary, there appears to be a sudden change in weight loss
intent from December to January – assuming that the se-
lected Google search terms do indeed measure “weight loss
intent”.

6. DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS

The data analyzed for this study does not come from a
randomized trial or from a representative sample of the pop-
ulation. Users who choose to publicly tweet their weight are
likely to diﬀer from a “normal” user trying to lose weight,
though (i) our population’s average weight and (ii) the weight
gain over Christmas were surprisingly close to known values.
Weber and Mejova [16] show that, with a certain amount of
noise, a user’s body weight or at least classes such as “over-
weight or not” can be inferred from their Twitter proﬁle pic-
tures. We are not relying on such noisy labels but, basically,
we are trading a loss in recall for an increase in precision.

A considerable fraction of users, 198 out of 391, had chosen
Japanese as their interface language and, correspondingly,
many of their tweets were not be in English. Google’s au-
tomatic translation might introduce errors, though for tasks
such as sentiment analysis machine translation typically per-
forms suﬃciently well [2].

7. CONCLUSIONS

In this paper, we presented a study that combines quanti-
ﬁed self data from internet-enabled smart scales with general
social media data on Twitter. We used this combination of
data sources to predict a user’s weight using only their social
media activity. Our data also capture weekly patterns, such
as a peak of weigh-in activity on Saturday, and monthly pat-
terns, such as a weight increase over Christmas. We believe
that such a data fusion between messy, general life style so-

20Also see http://tinyurl.com/z7r4c5s for more information
on this topic.

20406080JanFebMarAprMayJunJulAugSepOctNovDecMonthGoogle Search ScoreKeywordsBMIWeight Lossdiet97