Quantifying the Body and Caring for the Mind:               

Self-Tracking in Multiple Sclerosis 

Amid Ayobi1, Paul Marshall1, Anna L Cox1, Yunan Chen2 
1UCL Interaction Centre, University College London, WC1E 6EA, UK 
2Department of Informatics, University of California, Irvine, 92697, USA 
a.ayobi@cs.ucl.ac.uk, {paul.marshall; anna.cox}@ucl.ac.uk, yunanc@ics.uci.edu 

that  when 

ABSTRACT 
Consumer  health  technologies  have  an  enormous  potential 
to  transform  the  self-management  of  chronic  conditions. 
However,  it  is  unclear  how  individuals  use  self-tracking 
technologies to manage them. This in-depth interview study 
explores self-tracking practices in multiple sclerosis (MS), a 
complex  neurological  disease 
that  causes  physical, 
cognitive,  and  psychological  symptoms.  Our  findings 
the  unpredictable  and 
faced 
illustrate 
degenerative nature of MS, individuals regained a sense of 
control  by  intertwining  self-care  practices  with  different 
self-tracking 
in  disease 
technologies.  They  engaged 
monitoring, fitness tracking, and life journaling to quantify 
the  body  and  care  for  the  mind.  We  focus  attention  on  the 
role of emotional wellbeing and the experience of control in 
self-tracking  and  managing  MS.  Finally,  we  discuss  in 
which  ways  self-tracking  technologies  could  support  the 
foster  mindful 
experiential  nature  of  control  and 
experiences  rather  than  focusing  only  on  tracking  primary 
disease indicators. 

Author Keywords 
Self-care  technologies;  personal  informatics;  self-tracking; 
perceived control; chronic conditions; multiple sclerosis  

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous 

INTRODUCTION 
Consumer  health  technologies,  such  as  wearable  fitness 
tracking devices, symptom journals, and mental health apps 
have  an  enormous  potential  to  transform  self-management 
and  empower  people  to  better  understand  and  live  with 
chronic  conditions  [1,  39].  Previous  research  in  HCI  has 
paid  significant  attention  to  understanding  the  use  and 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or  classroom use is granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific permission and/or a fee.  
Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  
CHI 2017, May 06 - 11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA  
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to 
ACM. ACM 978-1-4503-4655-9/17/05…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025869 

design  of  bespoke  medical  devices  and  disease  monitoring 
applications that address common chronic conditions, such 
as  diabetes  [28],  hypertension  [21],  and  asthma  [44]. 
However,  the  role  of  both  contemporary  consumer  health 
technologies and of self-tracking practices in chronic illness 
management  that  go  beyond  disease  monitoring  have 
received much less attention.  

In  this  paper,  we  focus  on  MS,  the  most  common 
inflammatory chronic condition in young adults. MS affects 
the  central  nervous  system  causing  physical  impairments 
and also symptoms related to vision, cognition, and mental 
health [13]. Monitoring symptoms, being physically active, 
and  pursuing  good  psychological  health  are  important  in 
MS  self-management  [10,  13].  However,  studies  suggest 
that  the  documentation  of  individual  symptoms,  continual 
reporting of relapses, and balancing physical activity can be 
tracking 
challenging 
technologies have the potential to empower people in self-
managing  these  challenges.  Yet,  little  research  describes 
how  individuals  with  MS  use  and  experience  self-tracking 
technologies in everyday life.  

[10,  11].  Contemporary  health 

Here,  we  present  an  in-depth  interview  study  on  self-
tracking  practices  in  MS  self-management.  Our  research 
contributes to the body of research on self-care technologies 
[34]  and  personal  informatics  in  HCI  [2].  Primarily,  this 
research  provides  a  qualitative  account  of  the  motivations 
for and roles of self-tracking practices in MS management. 
We found that people living with MS experienced a lack of 
control  when  coping  with  unpredictable  relapses  and  the 
degenerative  nature  of  the  disease.  Despite  this,  our 
participants  gained  a  sense  of  control  over  MS  by 
intertwining  individual  self-care  practices  with  different 
self-tracking  technologies  such  as  paper-based  symptom 
diaries  and  wearable  fitness  tracking  devices.  This  study 
draws  attention  to  the  role  of  emotional  wellbeing  in  self-
tracking and highlights the role of self-tracking in regaining 
a  sense  of  control  over  an  unpredictable  and  degenerative 
disease.  Based  on  this  understanding,  this  study  discusses 
design  considerations  to  facilitate  self-tracking  in  MS  and 
similar  chronic  conditions,  namely:  supporting  self-
exploration  before  self-diagnosis;  drawing  not  only  on 
pathological  knowledge,  but  also  mediating  practice-based 
health  expertise;  and,  rather  than  concentrating  only  on 
tracking  primary  disease  indicators,  fostering  mindful 
experiences. 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6889 
 
BACKGROUND 
To  provide  background  to  this  research,  we  begin  by 
describing  seminal  work  on  self-monitoring  with  self-care 
technologies  and  then  outline  emerging  research  on  self-
informatics.  Next,  we 
tracking  practices 
introduce 
interdisciplinary 
research on health tracking technologies in MS.  

in  personal 
the  pathology  of  MS  and 

Self-Monitoring with Self-Care Technologies  
Much  research  in  HCI  has  focused  on  understanding  self-
management practices and the use of self-care technologies 
for common conditions [26, 34], such as diabetes [28, 36], 
hypertension [21], and asthma [44].  

Qualitative  studies  of  self-management  highlight 
the 
individual  experience,  idiosyncratic  character,  and  open-
ended  nature  of  self-care  practices  in  everyday  settings 
[42]:  Chen,  for  example,  sheds  light  on  the  varied  health 
information  management  practices  of  diabetes  patients  and 
stresses the need for individualised health technologies [6]. 
Mamykina  et  al.  [28]  describe  how  experienced  diabetes 
patients  appropriated  an  open-ended  and  flexible  self-
monitoring  application  to  track  routines,  reflect  upon  their 
personal stories, and perform identity construction work in 
daily  self-management.  Park  and  Chen  [38]  provide  a 
detailed  account  of  self-management  practices  performed 
by  people  affected  by  migraines.  They  describe  how  the 
unpredictability  and  intermittency  of  migraines  affected 
people’s  efforts  to  identify  individual  triggers,  and  also 
stress the importance of their need for social recognition.  

Self-care  technologies  play  a  central  role  in  self-managing 
chronic  conditions  [34].  They  are  not  limited  to  medical 
devices,  such  as  blood  glucose  meters  [36],  but  include  a 
wide  range  of  different  interactive  systems,  such  as  web 
tools  for  capturing  and  exploring  health-related  data  [28] 
and smartphone applications for monitoring symptoms [42]. 
Typically,  self-care  technologies  enable  people  to  record 
primary  disease  indicators,  which  is  often  described  as 
‘self-monitoring’  [34].  For  example,  self-monitoring  blood 
glucose  levels  in  diabetes  [6],  blood  pressure  by  people 
with  hypertension  [21],  and  mood  in  those  affected  by 
bipolar disorder [3], helped to develop understanding about 
the  course  of  the  disease,  react  to  fluctuating  measures, 
evaluate  health  behaviour,  and  adjust  to  the  respective 
condition in everyday life.  

Self-Tracking in Personal Informatics 
In  recent  years,  there  has  been  a  notable  increase  in  both  
consumer  self-tracking  technologies  and  related  research 
endeavours in HCI [2]. Studies have explored different self-
tracking  practices,  involving  physical  activity  [18],  food 
intake [8], and sleeping behaviour [24]. Rooksby et al. [15] 
characterise 
these  self-tracking  practices  as  ‘lived’  - 
enmeshed  in  everyday  life  -  and  reveal  five  overlapping 
self-tracking styles. Through directive tracking people often 
pursue a specific goal such as losing weight. Documentary 
tracking  highlights  that  people  not  only  track  to  change 

behaviour,  but  also  out  of  curiosity.  Diagnostic  tracking 
aims to uncover relationships between different phenomena 
such  as  diet  and  medication.  Collecting  rewards  refers  to 
people’s will to compete and receive rewards. In fetishised 
tracking  people  are  primarily  interested  in  the  appeal  and 
functionality of technologies per se.  

People  engage  in  self-tracking  because  they  gain  self-
awareness of their health behaviours and can develop good 
physical and nutritional practices [15, 22, 23]. Nevertheless, 
studies  suggest  that  a  significant  proportion  of  people  stop 
using  self-tracking  technologies  because  of  a  lack  of 
actionable  insights,  poor  aesthetics,  and  unmanageable 
maintenance [18, 22]. Notably, abandonment is not always 
due 
failure:  some  people  abandon  self-tracking 
technologies after having developed a routine, while others 
do  not  aim  to  reach  a  goal,  but  gain  a  new  awareness  of 
their  behaviour;  and  a  few  people  lapse  and  resume  self-
tracking over time because of shifting priorities [9, 15, 22].  

to 

These  findings,  based  primarily  on  healthy  populations, 
also  point  to  challenges  and  opportunities  for  self-tracking 
technologies  to  support  people  with  chronic  conditions  to 
self-manage their health and wellbeing. For example, Felipe 
and colleagues  [17] describe  roles for personal informatics 
in  chronic  pain  and  MacLeod  et  al.  [27]  illustrate  the 
potential  of  personal 
illness 
management,  stressing  opportunities  to  support  curiosity 
and self-discovery rather than behaviour change.   

in  chronic 

informatics 

Pathology of MS and Health Technologies in MS 
MS  is  the  most  common  inflammatory  chronic  illness  in 
young  adults.  It  is  not  curable,  but  is  manageable:  people 
living with MS may obtain a satisfactory quality of life by, 
for example, engaging in regular exercise, good nutritional 
practice, and mental health management [13]. 

MS  affects  the  central  nervous  system,  including  both  the 
brain and spinal cord. Neurons are the core components of 
the central nervous system and transmit signals to and from 
the  brain,  other  neurons,  sensory  organs,  and  muscles.  MS 
is  an  autoimmune  condition,  in  which  the  immune  system 
mistakenly damages the myelin - the insulating layer of the 
neurons  -  and,  consequently,  disrupts  the  communication 
between the brain and body, leading to a complex range of 
symptoms, 
involving  cognitive,  visual,  and  physical 
impairments  [24].  Most  people  with  MS  develop  the 
relapsing  remitting  type,  which  is  characterised  by  periods 
of  relapses,  when  symptoms  occur  for  a  few  days  or 
months,  and  remissions,  when  symptoms  are  mild  or 
disappear  for  several  months.  Approximately  65%  of 
people with relapsing remitting MS are also diagnosed with 
secondary  progressive  MS,  a  condition  in  which  the 
severity  of  symptoms 
the  periods  of 
remissions decline [13]. MS leads to increased physical and 
time.  Treatment  for  MS 
cognitive 
symptoms includes both drug and non-drug based therapies, 
such as physiotherapy and psychotherapy [10].  

impairments  over 

increases  and 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6890There  are  different  lines  of  research  that  have  addressed 
MS.  Medically  informed  studies  highlight  that  a  healthy 
lifestyle might alleviate several MS symptoms and foster an 
increased  quality  of  life  [10],  but  maintaining  physical 
activity  is  considered  to  be  a  key  challenge  [41].  Studies 
within  health  informatics  have  explored  whether  wearable 
physical  activity  tracking  devices  could  be  leveraged  to 
measure gait patterns and assess the progression of MS. For 
example,  Shammas  et  al.  [41]  used  3D  accelerometers  to 
track  changes  in  disabilities  more  effectively  than  clinical 
methods,  such  as  standardised  walking  tests.  McIninch  et 
al.  [31]  evaluated  the  use  of  a  consumer  activity  tracker 
with MS patients for a period of three weeks, reporting that 
the overall “user experience was extremely positive and MS 
patients found the FitBit One device a useful aid in helping 
quantify their walking.” HCI research with MS patients has 
focused  on  the  clinical  assessment  of  disability  with  the 
help  of  Microsoft  Kinect  [32]  and  personalisation  in  MS 
rehabilitation training in laboratory settings [35]. 

chronic 

conditions,  which  often 

In summary, previous HCI research has paid much attention 
to  self-management  practices  and  self-care  technologies  in 
common 
involve 
monitoring disease indicators [26]. Prior studies on personal 
informatics  offer  valuable  models  and  descriptions  of  how 
and  why  primarily  healthy  adults  use  and  abandon 
consumer  health  technologies  [15,  22,  40].  However,  the 
felt  experience  [30]  of  contemporary  consumer  health 
technologies  and  self-tracking  practices  in  chronic  illness 
management  that  go  beyond  disease  monitoring  has  not 
been examined closely enough. This study focuses on MS, 
a  chronic  condition  that  requires  a  high  level  of  self-
management  to  support  medical  treatment,  cope  with  the 
degenerative  progression  of  the  disease,  and  gain  a 
satisfactory quality of life. In this study, we aim to explore 
the  wider  experience  of  self-tracking 
in  MS  self-
management: what are the motivations for engaging in self-
tracking  and  how  do  people  living  with  MS  use  and 
experience self-tracking tools in everyday life? 

people  with  diverse  backgrounds  participated  in  our  study, 
from individuals who have been newly diagnosed with MS 
to  those  with  long-term  experience  in  self-managing  the 
disease.  Among  our  participants,  eleven  were  female  and 
four male, which mirrors the 3:1 prevalence ratio of women 
to men in MS [13]. Most participants were passionate about 
pursuing a healthy lifestyle and all engaged in self-tracking 
practices of their own volition.  

Data Collection and Analysis  
In order to gain a deeper understanding of our participants’ 
experiences  of  living  with  MS  and  their  self-tracking 
practices,  we  conducted  in-depth  interviews  [4].  Questions 
covered the following topics: diagnosis; symptoms; relapse 
experience;  lifestyle  routines;  and  self-tracking  tools  and 
practices,  and  focused  on  attitudes,  goals,  challenges,  and 
learnings.  Participants  chose  the  time  and  place  of  the 
interviews. Twelve interviews were conducted via Skype or 
FaceTime,  two  interviews  in  person  at  the  university,  and 
one  interview  over  the  phone.  Interviews  took  between  40 
and 135 minutes and were audio recorded. 

Analysis  started  after  the  first  interview  and  guided 
interview  questions.  The  qualitative  data 
subsequent 
analysis  software  NVivo  was  used  to  transcribe  the  audio 
recordings and thematically code data [5]. The data corpus 
was  iteratively  analysed  in  an  inductive,  ‘bottom  up’ 
fashion  drawing  on  open  and  axial  coding.  We  focused  on 
the  individual  experience  of  each  participant  who  had  a 
unique  presentation  of  MS,  individual  coping  strategies, 
and  particular  ways  of  using  self-tracking  tools.  At  later 
stages, the mind mapping software SimpleMind was used to 
create  mind  maps  visualising  emerging  themes,  associated 
categories,  and  sample  quotes  in  order  to  support  axial 
coding 
in  motivations, 
entanglements  between  different  self-tracking  styles,  and 
descriptions  covering  reflective  thinking  practices.  Mind 
maps also supported the discussion of quotes and emerging 
themes within the research team. 

differences 

explore 

and 

METHODOLOGY 
To  explore  the  questions  described  above,  fifteen  in-depth 
interviews were conducted with people diagnosed with MS. 
The study had institutional research ethics approval.  

interest  was 

Participants  
Since  our 
in  understanding  people’s 
experiences  with  self-tracking  technologies,  the  study 
focused  on  people  diagnosed  with  MS  who  use  or  have 
used  any  kind  of  tools  (e.g.  paper  diaries,  spreadsheet 
software,  mobile  apps,  fitness  tracking  devices,  etc.)  to 
track their health and wellbeing. Participants were recruited 
with the help of charities, including MS Society UK and MS 
Trust  UK,  which  published  our  study  advert  on  their 
the  online 
websites.  Furthermore,  administrators  of 
community shift.ms, and the MS meet-up group My Spirited 
Friends  shared  the  advert  with  their  members.  Fifteen 

the  participants 

FINDINGS  
in  our  study 
We  first  report  how 
experienced  a  lack  of  control  over  the  unpredictable  and 
degenerative  nature  of  MS.  Subsequently,  we  describe 
motivations  for  beginning  to  self-track  and  illustrate  the 
ways  people  regained  a  sense  of  control  over  MS  through 
intertwining  individual  self-care  practices  with  different 
self-tracking  technologies,  namely:  (1)  gaining  knowledge 
about the pathology of MS and self-knowledge about their 
own MS through disease monitoring; (2) pursuing a healthy 
lifestyle  and  self-tracking  physical  activities  and  dietary 
habits; (3) maintaining mental health management practices 
involving  life-journaling;  and  (4)  engaging  in  reflective 
thinking across tracked personal data and health behaviour. 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6891Lack of Control in Adjusting to MS 
People  affected  by  MS  reported  experiencing  a  lack  of 
control  when  going  through  unpredictable  relapses,  coping 
with the uncertain and degenerative progression of MS, and 
dealing with the resulting psychological burden.  

is  characterised  by  unpredictable 

Dealing with Ambiguous and Unpredictable Relapses   
MS 
relapses  and 
remissions.  A  clinical  relapse  is  defined  as  “either  the 
appearance of new symptoms related to MS or very definite 
worsening  of  old  symptoms,  which  lasted  for  at  least  24h 
and occurred after the patient had been stable for at least a 
month (with the absence of raised temperature, infection, or 
any other health problem).” [11]  

Identifying  relapses  was  not  only  important  to  adapting 
medication  and  document  the  progression  of  the  disease, 
but  also  to  experience  clarity,  assurance,  and  some  degree 
of  control  over  the  uncertainty  of  the  disease,  as  P8 
expressed:  “I  think  [I  track  a  relapse]  for  peace  of  mind. 
[…] For me it’s important to know. I would prefer to know 
and deal with something rather than be in ambiguity.” (P8)  

Some  participants  claimed  confidence  in  their  own  ability 
to identify, document, and report relapses. However, newly 
diagnosed individuals considered recognising relapses to be 
challenging. In particular, people reported facing challenges 
when  distinguishing  between  clinical  relapses  and  pseudo-
relapses,  since  both  types  lead  to  an  increase  of  MS 
symptoms.  Pseudo-relapses  are  not  caused  by  new  lesions 
in  the  central  nervous  system  but,  for  example,  by  heat 
sensitivity or infections, and can often be resolved within a 
short  period  of  time.  However,  pseudo-relapses  might  also 
trigger  clinical  relapses.  For  example,  P8  expressed 
uncertainty  when  distinguishing  between  infections  and 
relapses:  “The  answer  is:  I  don’t  know.  I  don't  think  that 
anybody  does  […].  I  can  never  be  sure  because  if  I  catch 
things like a cold it will bring all of my symptoms. So, I am 
never quite sure.” (P3)  

Moreover, participants faced a lack of control when coping 
with  the  unpredictability  of  relapses,  which  can  cause  a 
sudden  loss  of  bodily  functions  and  lead  to  significant 
physical deficits, as the following example shows: “And at 
any  point  in  time,  my  life  could  change  because  I  have  a 
relapse.  You  could  lose  your  eyesight,  use  a  wheelchair; 
that possibility never escapes from your head. […] I never 
know when it’s going to strike.” (P7)  

Coping with Mental Health Conditions 
MS  cannot  be  reduced  to  only  physical  disabilities,  but 
affects  people’s  “mental  health  as  well.  That’s  equally  if 
not  more 
(F5)  Specifically,  participants 
highlighted  that  the  uncertain  and  degenerative  nature  of 
MS  depicts  a  major  psychological  challenge,  as  this  quote 
exemplifies:  “For  me  the  biggest  thing  about  living  with 
MS  is  coping  with  the  knowledge  that  you  have  something 

important.” 

that  is  going  to  get  worse  in  time.  And  there  is  a  lot  of 
uncertainty  ahead.  And  that  psychological  burden  is  the 
biggest one to deal with.” (P13) 

Many  participants  reported  receiving  therapy  to  cope  with 
mental  conditions,  such  as  anxiety,  stress,  and  depressive 
episodes,  and  managing  their  fears  of  losing  physical 
abilities,  autonomy,  and  social  life  at  some  point.  For 
example, P5 reported experiencing anxiety, especially when 
dealing with the constantly changing character of MS: “So, 
when something new happens, or changes, or alters, I have 
to  get  used  to  that  change.  And  that's  something  I  can 
struggle  with.  And  I  actually  have  had  CBT  [cognitive 
behavioural therapy] to support me with that.” (P5).  

P2  was  seeing  a  psychologist  who  specialised  in  the 
specific  needs  of  MS  patients  in  order  to  cope  with  the 
many  mental  challenges:  “I  felt  like  a  CBT  therapist  was 
not good enough; they were overwhelmed when I told them 
what I’ve to deal with regarding my MS. I had to apply for 
a  proper  MS  psychologist  to  cope  with  feelings  such  as 
anger, loneliness, uselessness, frustration, and sadness.” 

Motivations to Engage in Self-Tracking  
In order to cope with the lack of control and uncertainties in 
self-managing MS, most participants developed a proactive 
attitude and engaged in different self-care practices, such as 
learning  about  the  pathology  of  MS,  maintaining  regular 
physical  activity  and  good  nutritional  practices,  and  caring 
for their mental wellbeing. Notably, the use of self-tracking 
tools,  such  as  paper  diaries  and  wearable  fitness  tracking 
devices,  was  enmeshed  in  their  self-care  practices.  These 
were  motivated  by  the  following  factors  across  our 
to  secondary 
participants:  wanting 
progressive  MS  and  being  afraid  of  losing  their  physical 
and  cognitive  abilities  at  some  later  point  in  life;  being 
proud  to  be  physically  active  -  to  be  able  to  walk,  run, 
cycle,  swim,  and  lift  -  despite  having  MS;  thinking 
prospectively  about  the  potential  effects  of  a  healthy 
lifestyle and preventing future regret of not having made all 
possible  efforts;  as  well  as  wanting  to  stay  as  healthy  as 
possible to be eligible for a cure in the near future.  

to  delay  moving 

Similar to lifestyle changes, self-tracking often started upon 
diagnosis, when people tried to grasp the complex nature of 
MS  and  to  gain  some  scaffolding  by  reading  about  it  and 
using  different  tools,  such  as  paper  diaries:  “I  didn't  know 
what was going on, I didn’t know where I was going next. I 
suppose that I just started to write stuff down as some sort 
of record, really, of what was happening to me.” (P11)  

Since presently neither drug-based treatment nor non-drug-
based  strategies  can  cure  MS,  many  participants  had 
reservations  about  clinicians,  questioned  the  ways  MS  is 
treated, and in an act of defiance focused on and believed in 
their own self-care skills to explore and adjust to MS, as the 
following examples illustrate:  

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6892Figure 1. Participants used paper diaries, PC software (e.g. MS Excel), tablets (e.g. timer), fitness trackers (e.g. Fitbit), smart 
phones (e.g. Headspace), and smart scales to engage in disease monitoring, fitness tracking, and mental health management. 

 “And  they  have  treatment,  but  they  do  not  know  how  to 
cure  it.  And  they  do  not  really  know  what  causes  it.  That 
doesn’t  fill  you  full  of  confidence,  anyway.  [...]  And  they 
are sceptical of the drugs, and the drugs are not the whole 
answer, but I decided to take the drugs and do everything I 
can [to self-manage MS].” (P7) 

“So, I feel like I need to have a better idea of what is going 
on  in  my  body  […]  Because  I  don’t  feel  like  my  medical 
professionals do. That gives me even more motivation to go 
and find out. I feel like I need to be an expert in myself and 
be an expert in my condition.” (P8) 

Self-Tracking Practices in MS 
Participants  in  our  study  engaged  in  a  wide  range  of 
different  self-tracking  practices  (see  Figure  1).  They  used 
various  tools  from  traditional  paper  diaries,  spreadsheet 
software, and web applications, to wearable fitness tracking 
devices  and  diverse  mobile  applications.  In  the  following 
sections, we focus on entanglements between different self-
care  practices  and  self-tracking  tools  addressing  emotional 
wellbeing and the experience of control.  

Disease Monitoring: Understanding MS Symptoms  
Diagnostic  practices  were  often  conducted  using  paper-
based health diaries, mobile food logging applications, and 
consumer fitness tracking devices. Individuals reported that 
their  emotional  wellness: 
disease  monitoring  affected 
sometimes  this  was  in  negative  ways  because  of  overly 
focusing  on  symptoms,  and  sometimes  positively  when 
exploring  causal  relationships  and  developing  a  sense  of 
control over MS triggers and symptoms. 

Participants  had  been  encouraged  -  often  over  a  short, 
defined period of time - to use structured pain, bladder, and 
bowel diaries provided by clinicians to document symptoms 
and inform clinical decision making. Some filled out these 
types  of  diaries  methodically,  others  on  the  fly  before 
appointments. Most participants kept their own paper-based 

health dairies for their “own benefit” appreciating that there 
is  “no  one  over  [their]  shoulder.”  (P5)  Drawing  on  our 
participants’  descriptions  and  photos  of  symptom  diaries, 
we have identified three different types of entries: the first 
was  self-reported  descriptions  of  symptoms,  such  as 
“double  vision,”  “pins  and  needles  types  of  sensation,” 
“head of cotton wool and porridge,” “mood, like anxiety,” 
“energy  levels,”  “spine  feels  like  I  have  sunburn,”  and 
“heavy  and  useless  legs.”  People  tended  to  use  self-
designed  scales  based  on  their  own  words  rather  than 
medical scales to define the severity of their symptoms. The 
second type of entry was measures from external tools. For 
example,  participants  manually  transferred  selected  data 
from  weight  scales,  thermometers,  and  blood  pressure 
monitors to their diaries in order to visualise, annotate, and 
compare  the  recorded  metrics  with  symptoms,  medication 
intake,  and  life-events.  The  third  type  of  entry  covered 
narratives  of  everyday  life,  including  mundane  activities 
and  sketched  thoughts.  Impressionistic  notes,  such  as 
“Really  struggled  today  -  heat?”  (P11,  paper  diary) 
contextualised  the  tracked  actions  and  helped  people  to 
revisit past experiences. Participants also used health diaries 
to prepare themselves for medical appointments in order to 
be  able 
to  effectively  communicate  symptoms  and 
demonstrate competence. 

In  addition  to  paper-based  health  diaries,  people  employed 
food logging apps to monitor and understand MS symptoms 
and  triggers  related  to  their  wellbeing.  Some  participants 
explored  relationships  between  food  intake  and  symptoms, 
such as fatigue. Others already made some findings, such as 
P4,  who  found  a  relationship  between  sugar  intake  and 
quality  of  sleep:  “If  I  have  too  much  sugar  it  keeps  me 
awake at night and it’s not good for my sleep.”  

Moreover,  wearable  consumer  fitness  tracking  devices 
participants 
supported 
associated  physical  activity  data  of  fitness  trackers  with 
periods  of  increased  or  decreased  severity  of  symptoms. 

practices.  Some 

diagnostic 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6893Others 
fitness 
interpreted  physiological  measures  of 
tracking  devices  as  indicating  illness.  For  example,  when 
reflecting  on  her  heart  rate  data,  P8  considered  the 
possibility that she was getting a cold: “Actually, my heart 
rate  is  up  a  little  bit  and  maybe  I  am  coming  down  with 
something.”  Based  on  her  past  experience,  she  explained 
further: “If you are coming down with a cold, that two days 
prior my cold started, my heart rate went up by average 5 
beats per minute a day.”  

reactions 

in  everyday 

life.  Notable,  a 

Monitoring  MS  symptoms  and  triggers  helped  especially 
newly  diagnosed  individuals  to  better  understand  their 
bodily 
few 
participants revealed that disease monitoring sometimes led 
to  unintended  effects:  focusing  on  a  predefined  list  of 
symptoms  might  lead  to  “worry  unnecessarily  about 
symptoms  they  don’t  have”  (P5)  and  also  monitoring 
symptoms  in  open-ended  ways  caused  sometimes  negative 
feelings,  as  P4  describes:  “I  guess  sometimes,  I  feel  a  bit 
obsessed  with  it.  Maybe,  I  should  not  be  thinking  about  it 
too much and just getting on with life. But I think that could 
come later on [...]. But I’ve had MS just since 2015, so I am 
still learning the ways how my body is.” 

Finding  a  balance  between  monitoring  and  an  excessive 
focus  on  symptoms  involved  different  coping  strategies, 
such  as  developing  a  mindful  attitude  and  intertwining 
different self-tracking styles. Exploring causal relationships 
between  MS  symptoms  and  different  factors,  such  as 
physical  activity,  diet,  and  sleep,  provided,  all  together,  a 
sense  of  having  some  degree  of  control  over  the  disease. 
For  example,  P8  explained  that  using  a  Fitbit  Charge  HR 
device to monitor her heart rate and cope with stressful life 
events  provided  a  sense  of  control  over  MS:  “Because 
research does say that there is correlation between MS and 
stress,  I  am  like,  well  if  I  manage  my  stress,  I’ll  be 
managing  my  MS.  Obviously,  this  is  not  a  complete  truth 
but in my head it gives me control over something.” 

Activity Tracking: Maintaining One’s Physical Abilities 
When  using  wearable  activity  tracking  devices  a  few 
participants  reported  feeling  pressure  to  perform  despite 
their  physical  limitations,  but  many  explained  having 
gained  an  increased  bodily  self-awareness  and  a  sense  of 
control  over  the  physical  symptoms,  especially,  when 
identifying  short-term 
improvements  and  periods  of 
stabilisation in the long-term. 

All  participants  stressed  that  being  physically  active  was 
essential  in  everyday  life:  it  affected  mood  and  energy 
levels  (P1),  made  people  “feel  happy”  (P2),  provided 
“mental  space”  and  was  a  “stress  reliever”  (P8), 
strengthened  muscles,  improved  balancing  (P11),  and 
helped  to  reduce  fatigue  (P4).  Using  fitness  tracking 
devices  (e.g.  Fitbit  Charge  HR)  and  various  fitness  apps 
(e.g.  Argus),  people  tracked  physical  activities,  such  as 
yoga, walking in everyday situations, walking and running 
defined  routes,  balance  exercises,  indoor  and  outdoor 

cycling, and weight lifting (e.g. Wendler Log). Furthermore, 
they  also  manually  captured  certain  activities,  such  as 
sedentary behaviour and meditation. 

Most  people  in  our  study  suggested  that  wearable  fitness 
tracking  devices  play  a  crucial  role  in  maintaining  their 
physical  and  psychological  wellbeing.  For  example, 
participants used measures, such as steps and heart rate, in 
order  to  gain  an  awareness  of  their  physical  abilities,  and 
tried to avoid overdoing it in order to prevent potential MS 
symptoms caused by overexertion, such as double vision. 

and 

goals, 

rewards, 

receiving 

improve  weight 

lifting,  walking,  and 

Core functionalities of fitness tracking applications, such as 
setting 
exploring 
visualisations of tracked data, led to mixed experiences. On 
the one hand, goal-setting functionalities were used by three 
participants  who  had  minimal  physical  symptoms  in  order 
to 
running 
performances.  Measures  of  activities  made  short-term 
achievements  tangible  and  participants  felt  proud  to  be 
physically active despite of being affected by MS: “Also, as 
a  positive  thing,  say,  you  know,  I  have  MS  but  I  can  still 
bench  press  so  many  kg.”  (P8)  On  the  other  hand,  many 
tried to meet well known fitness norms, such as the 10000 
steps  per  day  goal,  which  could  cause  pressure  and  “be 
quite  discouraging  when  you  know  that  you  can  only  walk 
so  far.”  (P10)  Rather  than  increasing  performances,  most 
participants,  especially  with  physical  impairments,  were 
interested  in  recovering  and  maintaining  their  physical 
capabilities. P9, who used an indoor exercise bike, revealed 
this  attitude  in  the  following  way:  “I’ve  found  setting  a 
target of exercising every day with MS is not feasible. It just 
seemed  like  pointless  pressure.  Now  if  I  feel  like  it,  I 
exercise  but  it’s  more  to  do  with  maintaining  flexibility 
rather than achieving targets.”  

A few participants were not keen on receiving  rewards for 
their  healthy  lifestyle  choices  in  in  fitness  apps.  They 
expressed  that  they  “don’t  care  to  get  a  badge”  (P9)  and 
focus rather on other functionalities such as using heart rate 
measures to inform diagnostic practices. In contrast to this, 
many  participants  stressed  the  importance  of  receiving 
rewards  for  their  effort  and  work  to  maintain  their  fitness. 
For  example,  P7  explained:  “Everyday  I  look  at  the  score 
card and I want to check that I got a gold star. And than it 
reminds  me  that  I’ve  done  everything  I  can  on  that  day  to 
be healthy and that I can do no more.” 

Charts that visualised low steps counts and negative trends 
were  sometimes  perceived  as  discouraging  due  to  the 
progressive  physical  decline  that  people  with  MS  have  to 
cope with. For example, P10 described: “The graphs for me 
are kind of counterintuitive.  […] For someone with MS or 
for someone has got mobility issues, it can be another sign 
that you are not the same person you were a few years ago. 
If you are already feeling like it is an uphill struggle, then 
having something like that discourages you even more.” 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6894feel  more 

In  contrast  to  this  point  of  view,  visual  representations  of 
mobility  data  -  recorded  over  the  long-term  -  could  be  a 
helpful tool to cope with the progressive decline of physical 
abilities.  Long-term  activity  data  revealed  periods  of 
improvement, stabilisation and stagnation and, in doing so, 
made  people 
rational,  experience  hope, 
motivation, and vindication for their efforts, and a sense of 
control  over  the  progressive  nature  of  the  disease.  For 
example,  P11  had  recorded  her  walking  performance  and 
balancing  exercises  in  a  paper  diary  for  over  five  years. 
Reflecting  upon  her  data  she  explained:  “When  it’s  going 
badly,  I  feel,  it’s  helping  me  to  see  how  fast  it's  getting 
worse  and  it  sort  of  gives  me  some  sense  to  try  to  slow  it 
down which is better than the feeling, not having any data; 
it’s  going  to  be  hopeless.  I  can  look  at  the  graph  and  go: 
actually,  over  that  period  of  time  of  five  years,  I  definitely 
improved my condition. So, I feel some form of vindication 
that the effort that I put into it, made some difference. [...] 
For  me  documenting  stuff  is  being  partly  about  staying  in 
control, knowing what is happening to me.” 

Food Logging: Improving Wellbeing through Mindful Eating 
Most people explored different diets over time and aimed to 
“avoid food that has been shown by MS research studies to 
have  negative  effects  on  MS,”  as  P8  representatively 
explained.  They  tried  to  avoid  wheat,  gluten,  dairy,  meat, 
and  sugar  in  order  to  follow  an  “anti-inflammatory”  diet. 
People  engaged  in  food  logging  because  of  the  increased 
priority  “to  look  after  the  body”  after  diagnosis  (P5);  to 
lose  or  maintain  weight  in  order  to  be  “able  to  exercise 
better”  (P11),  and  to  gain  weight  because  “under  weight 
persons  are  more  vulnerable  to  infections,  which  can 
trigger relapses” (P4). 

In the past, participants had used paper-based health diaries 
to  document  their  dietary  practices  including  detailed 
information from consumed products to the specific amount 
of  saturated  and  unsaturated  fat  which  required  manual 
calculation.  Many  switched  from  keeping  paper-based 
diaries to food logging apps over time in order to reduce the 
manual  work  of  tracking.  One  participant  switched  from 
using  a  food  journaling  app  to  a  lightweight  paper  diary 
which  she  placed  in  the  kitchen  in  order  to  collaboratively 
manage a healthy diet with her family.  

Most  participants,  who  tracked  their  nutritional  practices 
and  physical  exercises,  connected  the  two:  food  journaling 
apps  were  often  linked  to  physical  activity  tracking 
applications  to  determine  the  relationship  between  calorie 
intake  and  calories  burned  (e.g.  Weight  Watchers).  Some 
registered physical activities manually in food logging apps 
(e.g.  MyFitnessPal)  because  they  were  not  accurately 
recorded  by  fitness  tracking  devices,  such  as  yoga  or 
individual balance exercises.  

Compared  to  the  perceived  benefits  of  being  physically 
active,  most  participants  explained  that  it  was  not  clear  to 
them  whether  pursing  a  healthy  diet  significantly  affected 

the  presentation  of  MS.  However,  they  emphasised  that 
engaging  proactively  in  good  nutritional  practices  fostered 
certainly  positive  emotional  wellbeing  which  “itself  is  a 
good  thing.”  (P11)  Both,  food  and  physical  activity 
tracking  were  considered  as  “fundamental  part[s]  of 
maintaining on a healthy path” (P7).  

Life Journaling: Coping with Everyday Life   
Most people started to engage in mental health management 
practices,  such  as  life  journaling  and  the  use  of  meditation 
apps  (e.g.  Headspace),  when  they  tried  to  cope  with  the 
disruptive changes and psychosocial impacts caused by MS. 
Life  journaling  involved  the  use  of  paper  diaries,  gratitude 
journals,  and  digital  smart  journals  (e.g.  Five  Minute 
Journal).  They  used  diaries  in  order  to  capture  MS-related 
experiences,  non-MS-related  thoughts,  and  specifically 
positive feelings. Many perceived the process of writing as 
enjoyable  and 
journal  helped 
therapeutic.  Keeping  a 
individuals  to  cope  with  and  be  in  control  of  negative 
thoughts related to the unpredictable implications of living 
with MS. For example, P11 perceived her diary as a way to 
‘talk  to  herself’  within  a  private  and  protected  space:  “I 
suppose that it’s also a part of escape for me, because it’s 
the  one  place  I  can  talk  about  MS  without  burdening 
anybody else with the problems of it.” 

Aside  from  addressing  MS,  many  other  topics  and  life 
events  were  recorded.  P7  stated  that,  in  contrast  to  the 
fitness  tracking  and  food  logging  applications,  her  paper 
diary  is  less  about  the  physical,  but  more  about  the 
emotional  issues  she  faced  in  life:  “I  would  just  capture 
some of the thoughts that I had about losing my mother and 
how that feels. Not just about my MS.”  

Moreover,  some  participants  recorded  specifically  “things 
you are positive about […] and grateful for in life” (P8) or 
“something  very  small  that  other  people  might  just  look 
over”  (P5),  such  as  having  a  catch  up  at  Starbucks  with 
friends,  learning  some  new  stretches  at  a  ballet  class,  and 
taking  time  to  use  the  Headspace  app  to  meditate. 
Participants  looked  back  at  these  captured  experiences 
when they went through the ‘bad days’ of living with MS.    

Keeping diaries or gratitude journals seemed to help people 
to  cope  with  everyday  life,  develop  confidence,  and  gain 
optimism  and  hope.  P11,  who  recorded  her  walking 
performances,  experiences,  and  thoughts  in  her  diary, 
explained that the experience and practice of writing can be 
a motivational coping strategy: “If you had a bad day, you 
just  write  it  down,  you  close  that  book,  and  go:  all  right 
that’s  fine,  I  am  done,  tomorrow  I  will  try  again.”  In  a 
similar way, P5 reported that having filled out her gratitude 
journal  after  her  symptom  diary,  helped  her  to  avoid 
focusing  on  symptoms  and  negative  experiences: “Kind  of 
ending  the  day  on  a  positive  note,  rather  than  thinking 
about stuff that stresses me out.” 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6895Reflective Thinking through Self-Tracking  
Participants  in  our  study  reported  engaging  in  reflective 
thinking across different self-tracking tools and practices. In 
doing  so,  they  explored  causal  relationships  between 
symptoms  and  everyday  actions,  dealt  with  uncertainty  in 
self-tracked data and the unpredictability of MS, and gained 
self-awareness and health expertise over time.  

Varied Interest in Reflection 
People  with  MS  had  a  diverging  interest  and  expressed  a 
varying  degree  of  engagement  in  exploring  tracked  health 
data.  For  example,  P8  took  a  look  at  the  tracked  data  only 
occasionally  and  briefly  when  there  was  some  time 
available  (“I  don’t  really  look  back  at  it  either,  to  be 
honest. I roll back on the data when I’ve got a free couple 
of minutes, when I am early for a dentist appointment.”) P7 
seemed  to  spend  more  time  exploring  her  fitness  data  and 
was driven by joy and passion (“And I enjoy looking at it. I 
love tracking the charts and seeing how I am getting on.”). 
P11  was  keen  on  conducting  self-experiments  in  order  to 
investigate actions that had a positive impact on her MS in 
everyday  life:  “Like  any  good  scientist,  I  went:  OK,  I  am 
going to try this experiment now and I am going to record 
what I measure and see if it helps.” 

Connecting Self-Tracking Tools and Practices  
Most  participants  connected  different  self-tracking  styles, 
such  as  fitness  tracking  and  life  journaling.  For  example, 
P11 explained that tracking physical activities helped her to 
understand  and  adjust  to  MS  in  everyday  life,  whereas 
capturing  her  thoughts  motivated  her  to  maintain  good 
physical  practices:  “The  numbers  [of  tracked  steps]  are 
there  to  really  help  me  to  retain  some  sort  of  control  and 
help  me  to  practically  manage  my  condition  and  trying  to 
do the things that make it less bad. It [life journaling] is the 
emotional  will:  it  helps  you  for  your  motivation  to  go  on 
and do the things that rationally, probably, I need to do to 
stay as healthy as I can. So, it works together.” 

and 

seamless 

connections 

While making sense of different self-tracking practices and 
personal  health  data,  most  participants  experienced  a  lack 
across 
of 
technologies. Many stressed that they are the ones who are 
not  only  connecting  but  also  contextualising  tracked  data 
across  tools:  “I  don’t  think  there  are  connections  at  the 
moment. Other than what I think is in my head, there is no 
connection  between  the  data.  It  all  comes  together  to 
become part of everyday.” (P8) 

interactions 

Causal Relationships and Uncertainty 
Participants  in  our  study  developed  causal  relationships 
across individual triggers, symptoms, and mundane actions 
in  order  to  better  understand  their  unique  manifestation  of 
MS and explore how to adjust to MS in everyday life. This 
was  a  time-extensive  learning  process  in  which  people 
developed 
idiosyncratic  ‘best 
practices.’  In  doing  so,  they  often  perceived  self-tracked 
data as evidence for observed phenomena and assumptions 

their  own  unique  and 

they  made  while  being  aware  of  the  uncertain  and 
constantly  changing  nature  of  MS.  P10,  for  example, 
expressed  the  relationships  between  critical  dimensions, 
such as time and the unpredictability of MS, and emotional 
factors  such  as  being  proactive  and  gaining  a  sense  of 
control,  when  exploring  causalities  in  everyday  life  in  the 
following  way:  “I  have  also  realised  that  where  fatigue 
happens  quite  immediately  after  something,  like  going  of 
the  tube,  then  I  know,  there  is  a  more  direct  correlation 
between one and the other. When it is something like stress 
and how busy you are that’s harder because the cause and 
effect is a greater distance in time. I try, I mean, that’s the 
thing, you just don’t know. You can’t say exactly, hand on 
heart, that’s exactly what it is. You do your best to try and 
work it out because, I think, if I didn’t, I wouldn’t be feeling 
like  I  was  being  proactive.  If  I  am  proactive  I  am  more  in 
control and the bully [MS] is less in control.” 

Notably,  inaccuracy,  uncertainty,  and  ambiguity  in  tracked 
data  did  not  necessarily  lead  to  frustration,  but  sometimes 
made room for speculations and explorations. For example, 
P6  reflected  on  the  causal  relationships  she  anticipated  in 
the  past  and  the  uncertainty  of  her  recently  increased 
symptoms:  “But  actually,  if  I  was  able  to  answer  it 
[reasons for increased severity of symptoms], would I even 
want  to  know  the  answer  anyway?  Because  if  I  can’t  do 
anything about it, then it would make it even worse. So, not 
being  able  to  answer  it  and  trying  to,  that,  actually,  gives 
me a purpose to explore it.”  

Self-Knowledge and Health Expertise  
Participants  claimed  to  have  gained  bodily  self-awareness, 
self-knowledge, and health expertise regarding how to live 
with  MS.  They  reported  obtaining  practical  knowledge 
about  the  disease  and  self-knowledge  through  both  doing 
research  online  and  self-tracking,  which  appeared  to  make 
them  feel  more  rational,  self-confident,  and  accountable. 
For  example,  before  keeping  a  bladder  diary,  P4  thought: 
“If I don’t drink too much and I am going out, I won’t need 
a toilet just halfway down the road.” After having kept the 
diary, her thinking was to some extent medically informed 
and more holistic in terms of the pragmatic implications of 
being  hydrated:  “I’ve  to  think  of  the  bigger  picture  that 
actually,  being  dehydrated  will  irritate  my  bladder  even 
more.  […]  By  drinking  more  water  in  the  morning  rather 
than  in  the  evening,  that  can  stop  me  from  going  to  the 
toilet more at night; […] it flushes away toxins; it can help 
your immune system.” 

However,  people  with  MS  explained  that  they  were 
sometimes  not  able  to  find  answers  for  their  health  related 
questions, especially, when medical data was not available 
or  accessible.  For  example,  P7  reported:  “I’ve  been 
collecting data in my journal and now on my Fitbit, it’s not 
the right data. It’s not all of the data.” In addition to fitness 
data, she was interested in using annual MRI scans or blood 
values  to  infer  whether  her  lifestyle  had  a  positive  impact 
on the progression of her MS. 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6896DISCUSSION   
This  study  has  investigated  self-tracking  practices  in  MS 
self-management.  Below,  we  use  this  understanding  to 
discuss the intertwined role of the experience of control and 
mental  wellbeing  in  self-tracking  and  address  design 
consideration for future self-tracking technologies.  

Self-Tracking to Support the Experience of Control 
Participants  in  our  study  reported  facing  a  lack  of  control 
when  adjusting  to  the  ambiguous,  unpredictable,  and 
degenerative  nature  of  MS  in  everyday  life.  Our  findings 
suggest  that  people  regained  a  sense  of  control  over  MS 
through  intertwining  individual  self-care  practices  with  a 
wide range of different self-tracking technologies.  

Perceived control is a seminal psychological construct that 
is defined as the “belief that one can determine one’s own 
internal states and behaviour, influence one’s environment, 
and/or  bring  about  desired  outcomes.”  [43]  A  significant 
body  of  interdisciplinary  research  suggests  that  perceived 
control  is  an  important  factor  in  adopting  and  maintaining 
good  physical  and  psychological  health  [37,  43].  Within 
HCI,  Mamykina  et  al.  have  utilised  the  Health  Locus  of 
Control  questionnaire  in  order  to  evaluate  the  application 
MAHI  with  diabetes  patients  and  reported  an  increase  of 
perceived  control  [29].  MAHI  supported  individuals  with 
diabetes in changing their diet through self-monitoring and 
social interaction with diabetes educators.  

In  contrast  to  blood  glucose  values  in  diabetes  self-
management,  there  is  no  primary  disease  indicator  in  MS 
that  can  be  effectively  measured  and  controlled  through 
self-care. Notably, MS is a degenerative and unpredictable 
disease  that  is  neither  curable  nor  controllable.  The 
experience of control that we encountered here appeared to 
be  grounded  in  a  mindful  mindset  and  positive  wellbeing, 
involved  coping  with  uncertainty  when  exploring  causal 
relationships, and faded when experiencing relapses. Using 
self-tracking  technologies  alone  did  not  support  people  to 
gain a feeling of being in control. Our study illustrates that 
the  experience  of  control  was  related  to  entanglements 
between idiosyncratic self-care practices and different self-
tracking tools, involving knowledge about the pathology of 
MS  and  self-knowledge  about  MS  (disease  monitoring), 
healthy 
tracking),  mental  health 
management (life-journaling), and reflective thinking across 
personal  health  data  and  behaviour.  Altogether,  these  key 
practices  empowered  people  to  regain  a  sense  of  control 
over MS. 

lifestyles 

(fitness 

Along  with  paper-based  diaries,  wearable  fitness  tracking 
devices  played  an  important  role  in  empowering  people  to 
self-manage MS. For example, participants used the ‘novel’ 
physiological data of activity tracking devices, such as heart 
rate,  to  not  only  maintain  their  fitness,  but  also  to  explore 
triggers,  such  as  stress.  By  gaining  an 
symptom 
understanding of their body and exploring how to adjust to 
these  triggers  they  gained  a  sense  of  control  over  the 

complex  nature  of  MS.  In  contrast  to  prior  studies  [18], 
accuracy  of  tracking  devices  and  uncertainty  in  personal 
health  data  played  a  minor  role.  Most  participants  in  our 
study did not conduct experiments like scientists (cf. [40]), 
but  tracked  their  individual  symptoms  in  an  idiosyncratic, 
open-ended  fashion  developing  their  own  personal  health 
data  ecologies.  They  trusted  not  only  in  their  agency  to 
develop 
tracked 
symptoms,  and  mundane  actions  but  also  stressed  the 
benefits of the experience of the self-tracking practice itself, 
and, most importantly, believed in their own interpretations 
and assumptions they made.  

‘mental  connections’  across 

tools, 

for 

self-tracking 

technologies 

[19]  and  beyond 

This  lived  character  of  tracking  practices  in  MS  reveals  a 
critical  dimension  that  needs  to  be  considered  when 
self-
designing 
experimentation  and  self-diagnosis,  which  are  increasingly 
explored  within  HCI 
[25].  Self-
experimentation  tools  have  great  potential  to  support  self-
tracking  practices  by  providing  guidance  and  evidence 
when  identifying  not  only  correlational  but  also  causal 
relationships  between 
[20]. 
Designing self-experimentation applications that encourage 
users  to  formulate  a  valid  hypothesis,  identify  independent 
and  dependent  variables,  and  choose  a  single  independent 
variable to test in the real world, poses not only conceptual 
challenges. Our findings suggest that pre-defined, dualistic, 
and  deterministic  design  approaches  of  diagnosis  could 
violate  people’s  agency  and  experience  of  control  in  self-
managing their health.  

symptoms  and 

triggers 

In  order  to  avoid  dictating  and  mindless  experiences,  self-
tracking technologies could empower people to proactively 
care  for  their  health  and  wellbeing  by  mediating  practice-
based health expertise and fostering self-exploration. Rather 
than focusing on binary outcomes, applications could focus 
on  the  self-tracking  process  itself  in  order  to  support 
people’s  reflective  thinking  and  opportunities  to  explore 
what  health  behaviour  might  help  to  adjust  to  MS  in 
everyday  life.  These  considerations  underpin  the  need  for 
self-tracking  technologies  that  consider  the  individual’s 
context [7],  support personalisation [42] and customisation 
[18],  and  also  foster  self-discovery  [27].  However,  since 
knowledge  about  the  complex  pathology  of  MS  was  key 
when  engaging  in  diagnostic  tracking  and  gaining  a  sense 
of  control  over  ‘the  unknown,’  self-tracking  technologies 
could  provide  practice-based  health  expertise.  Relevant 
pathological  knowledge,  such  as  scientifically  grounded 
associations  between  MS  symptoms  and  health  behaviour, 
can  be 
to  common 
language,  iteratively  elaborated,  and  evaluated  with  people 
affected  by  MS  in  order  to  uncover  uncertainties  and 
mismatches,  surface  their  hidden  health  competence,  and 
together  co-create  informative  content  for  self-tracking 
technologies. In this way, we could mediate practice-based 
knowledge  concerning  why,  what,  and  how  to  self-track 
and become more in control of “the bully MS.” (P10)  

translated  from  medical  models 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6897Self-Tracking to Foster Mental Wellbeing   
Most previous research in HCI has addressed mental health 
tracking  and  management  in  populations  that  are  affected 
primarily  by  mental  illnesses,  such  as  depression  [16]  and 
bipolar disorder [3]. We would like to draw attention to the 
role of self-tracking with the less visible but still significant 
mental challenges that people experience when living with 
unpredictable chronic conditions, such as MS.  

Research  has  paid  much  attention  to  tracking  physical 
mobility  in  order  to  assess  the  progression  [32]  and  foster 
physical  activity  in  MS  [35].  Indeed,  many  participants  in 
our  study  tracked  their  fitness  in  order  to  maintain  their 
physical  abilities.  However,  our  findings  highlight  that 
there  are  concerns  beyond  tracking  the  performance  of 
primary  disease  indicators:  people  living  with  MS  had  to 
deal with enormous mental challenges, such as dealing with 
the  degenerative  course  of  the  disease  and  unpredictability 
of  the  next  relapse,  and  being  afraid  of  not  being  able  to 
participate  in  social  life  at  some  indeterminate  point.  Our 
findings  illustrate  that  people  with  MS  were  able  to  cope 
with  some  of 
these  psychological  challenges  when 
engaging in self-tracking their health and wellbeing. Similar 
to Elsden et al.’s work [12], we found that keeping a diary 
was  perceived  as  therapeutic  and  supported  people  in 
coping  with  negative  thoughts.  In  addition,  our  findings 
suggest that further self-tracking practices affected people’s 
emotional  wellbeing  in  similar  ways.  For  example,  some 
participants perceived documenting and identifying relapses 
as depressing, while others explained that it was important 
for  their  peace  of  mind.  Many  who  engaged  in  disease 
monitoring  admitted  that  focusing  on  symptoms  could  be 
sometimes hopeless but reported being proud and confident 
when  they  identified  relationships  between  symptoms  and 
triggers.  In  some  cases,  physical  activity  data  revealed 
periods of stabilisation and enabled people to become more 
in  control,  instead  of  being  led  by  fears  about  the 
progression of physical impairments.  

These  observations  suggest  that  the  design  of  self-tracking 
technologies  should  not  only  consider  primary  disease 
indicators but also needs to acknowledge the emotional and 
mental  wellbeing  of  people  who  are  living  with  an 
unpredictable  and  degenerative  condition.  Moreover,  these 
findings  exemplify  that  mindful  self-tracking  depicts  a 
powerful strategy to cope with the psychological challenges 
people  experience  in  everyday  life.  Mindfulness,  the 
“process of drawing novel distinctions,” enables people to 
develop  sensitivity,  adopt  alternative  viewpoints,  adapt  to 
constant  changes 
the 
life  and, 
experience of control [37].  

therefore,  fosters 

in 

facilitate open-ended self-tracking and imply in which ways 
entanglements between different tracking styles, such as life 
journaling,  fitness  tracking,  and  disease  monitoring,  could 
be  supported.  In  this  way,  self-tracking  applications  could 
stimulate  parallel  thinking  and  reduce  unintended  effects, 
such as overly focusing on symptoms.  

fitness 

Moreover, 
tracking  applications  could  help 
individuals  with  MS  to  not  only  be  mindfully  active  but 
also  cope  with  physical  decline  in  the  long-term.  Since 
people  with  MS  had  relapses  and  remissions  over  time, 
their experiences of being physical active were emotionally 
rich.  Instead  of  focusing  on  increasing  performances, 
design approaches of contemporary fitness tracking devices 
and  applications  need  to  be  sensitive  to  considerable 
in  physical  capabilities,  motivations,  and 
fluctuations 
engagement.  Tailored  framing  and  visual  cuts  in  data 
representations have been shown to be valuable techniques 
in the context of personal informatics [14] and offer further 
design  opportunities  to  help  people,  who  are  affected  by 
physical symptoms, not only to become aware of short-term 
improvements but also to recognise periods of stabilisation 
and  stagnation  in  the  long-term.  Furthermore,  drawing  on 
fostering  an  awareness  of 
biofeedback 
physiological changes before, during, and after being active 
could  support  people  in  recovering,  avoiding  overdoing  it 
[33], and obtaining a balance between body and mind. 

[37]  and 

to 

lack  of  control  due 

CONCLUSION  
Most  previous  research  has  focused  on  common  chronic 
conditions  that  typically  involve  disease  monitoring.  This 
study 
investigates  different  self-tracking  practices  of 
individuals  living  with  multiple  sclerosis,  a  complex 
neurological  condition  causing  a  wide  range  of  physical, 
cognitive,  and  psychological  impairments.  We  found  that 
when  experiencing  a 
the 
unpredictable  and  degenerative  nature  of  MS,  individuals 
through 
their  sense  of  control  over  MS 
regained 
intertwining  individual  self-care  practices  with  different 
self-tracking  tools  ranging  from  paper-based  diaries  to 
wearable fitness tracking devices. In doing so, they engaged 
in  disease  monitoring,  fitness  tracking,  and  life  journaling 
to understand the body and care for the mind. In this paper, 
we  have  focused  attention  on  the  role  of  emotional 
wellbeing  in  self-tracking  and  the  role  of  self-tracking  in 
regaining  a  sense  of  control  over  an  unpredictable  and 
progressive disease. We have discussed in which ways self-
tracking  technologies  could  support  the  experience  of 
control  and,  rather  than  focusing  only  on  tracking  primary 
disease indicators, foster mindful experiences.  

In  order  to  aid  mindful  disease  monitoring,  the  design  of 
health 
tracking  applications  could,  for  example,  be 
informed by an emerging class of hybrid systems that have 
not  been  explored  in  the  context  of  chronic  illness:  smart 
journals are autonomous life-logging applications that draw 
on  personal  social,  fitness,  and  contextual  data  [12].  They 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Many thanks to all participants for sharing their experiences 
and to Clara Marques Caldeira, Katarzyna Stawarz, and our 
reviewers  for  providing  constructive  feedback  on  earlier 
versions of this paper. Amid Ayobi is funded by an EPSRC 
DTG studentship and Overseas Doctoral Award. 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6898REFERENCES 

1. 

Jessica S Ancker, Holly O Witteman, Baria Hafeez, 
Thierry Provencher, Mary Van de Graaf, and Esther 
Wei. 2015. “You Get Reminded You’re a Sick 
Person”: Personal Data Tracking and Patients With 
Multiple Chronic Conditions. Journal of Medical 
Internet Research 17, 8. 
https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.4209 

2.  Amid Ayobi, Paul Marshall, and Anna L. Cox. 2016. 

Reflections on 5 Years of Personal Informatics: Rising 
Concerns and Emerging Directions. In Proceedings of 
the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ’16), 
2774–2781. https://doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2892406 

3. 

Jakob E. Bardram, Mads Frost, Károly Szántó, Maria 
Faurholt-Jepsen, Maj Vinberg, and Lars Vedel 
Kessing. 2013. Designing Mobile Health Technology 
for Bipolar Disorder: A Field Trial of the Monarca 
System. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’13), 
2627–2636. https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2481364 

4.  Ann Blandford, Dominic Furniss, and Stephann Makri. 
2016. Qualitative HCI Research: Going Behind the 
Scenes. Synthesis Lectures on Human-Centered 
Informatics 9, 1: 1–115. 

5.  Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using 

thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research 
in Psychology 3, 2: 77–101. 
https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa 

6.  Yunan Chen. 2010. Take It Personally: Accounting for 

Individual Difference in Designing Diabetes 
Management Systems. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM 
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS 
’10), 252–261. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1858171.1858218 

7.  Eun Kyoung Choe, Nicole B. Lee, Bongshin Lee, 

Wanda Pratt, and Julie A. Kientz. 2014. Understanding 
Quantified-selfers’ Practices in Collecting and 
Exploring Personal Data. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’14), 1143–1152. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557372 

8.  Felicia Cordeiro, Daniel A. Epstein, Edison Thomaz, 
Elizabeth Bales, Arvind K. Jagannathan, Gregory D. 
Abowd, and James Fogarty. 2015. Barriers and 
Negative Nudges: Exploring Challenges in Food 
Journaling. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’15), 1159–1162. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702155 

9.  A. L. Cox, J. Bird, and R. Fleck. 2013. Digital 

Epiphanies: how self-knowledge can change habits and 
our attitudes towards them. In Presented at: The 27th 

International British Computer Society Human 
Computer Interaction Conference: The Internet of 
things, Brunel University, London, UK. (2013). 
http://www.digitalepiphanies.org/publications.html 

10.  Andrea Döring, Caspar F. Pfueller, Friedemann Paul, 
and Jan Dörr. 2013. Exercise in Multiple Sclerosis – 
An Integral Component of Disease Management. In 
Neurodegenerative Diseases: Integrative PPPM 
Approach as the Medicine of the Future, Silvia Mandel 
(ed.). Springer Netherlands, 277–299. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-5866-7_12 

11.  Martin Duddy, Martin Lee, Owen Pearson, Esmaeil 

Nikfekr, Abhijit Chaudhuri, Fran Percival, Megan 
Roberts, and Carolyn Whitlock. 2014. The UK patient 
experience of relapse in Multiple Sclerosis treated with 
first disease modifying therapies. Multiple Sclerosis 
and Related Disorders 3, 4: 450–456. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.msard.2014.02.006 

12.  Chris Elsden, Abigail C. Durrant, and David S. Kirk. 
2016. It’s just my History isn’t it?: Understanding 
Smart Journaling Practices. In Proceedings of the 2016 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI ’16), 2819–2831. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858103 

13.  Nikki Embrey. 2014. Multiple sclerosis: managing a 
complex neurological disease. Nursing Standard 29, 
11: 49–58. https://doi.org/10.7748/ns.29.11.49.e9190 

14.  Daniel A. Epstein, Jennifer H. Kang, Laura R. Pina, 

James Fogarty, and Sean A. Munson. 2016. 
Reconsidering the device in the drawer: lapses as a 
design opportunity in personal informatics. In 
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint 
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, 
829–840. http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2971648.2971656 

15.  Daniel A. Epstein, An Ping, James Fogarty, and Sean 
A. Munson. 2015. A Lived Informatics Model of 
Personal Informatics. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM 
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and 
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp ’15), 731–742. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804250 

16.  Ramesh Farzanfar, Sophie Frishkopf, Robert 

Friedman, and Kevin Ludena. 2007. Evaluating an 
automated mental health care system: making meaning 
of human–computer interaction. Computers in Human 
Behavior 23, 3: 1167–1182. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2004.11.015 

17.  Sergio Felipe, Aneesha Singh, Caroline Bradley, 
Amanda CdeC Williams, and Nadia Bianchi-
Berthouze. 2015. Roles for Personal Informatics in 
Chronic Pain. In Proceedings of the 9th International 
Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for 
Healthcare (PervasiveHealth ’15), 161–168. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2826165.2826189 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA689918.  Daniel Harrison, Paul Marshall, Nadia Bianchi-

Berthouze, and Jon Bird. 2015. Activity Tracking: 
Barriers, Workarounds and Customisation. In 
Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint 
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing 
(UbiComp ’15), 617–621. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2805832 

19.  Ravi Karkar, James Fogarty, Julie A. Kientz, Sean A. 
Munson, Roger Vilardaga, and Jasmine Zia. 2015. 
Opportunities and Challenges for Self-experimentation 
in Self-tracking. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 2015 
ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and 
Ubiquitous Computing and Proceedings of the 2015 
ACM International Symposium on Wearable 
Computers (UbiComp/ISWC’15 Adjunct), 991–996. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2800835.2800949 

20.  Ravi Karkar, Jasmine Zia, Roger Vilardaga, Sonali R. 
Mishra, James Fogarty, Sean A. Munson, and Julie A. 
Kientz. 2015. A framework for self-experimentation in 
personalized health. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association: ocv150. 

21.  Karina Kusk, Dorthe B. Nielsen, Troels Thylstrup, 

Niels Holm Rasmussen, Jacob Jorvang, Christian F. 
Pedersen, and Steffen Wagner. 2013. Feasibility of 
using a lightweight context-aware system for 
facilitating reliable home blood pressure self-
measurements. In Pervasive Computing Technologies 
for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2013 7th 
International Conference on, 236–239.  

22.  Amanda Lazar, Christian Koehler, Joshua Tanenbaum, 
and David H. Nguyen. 2015. Why we use and abandon 
smart devices. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM 
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and 
Ubiquitous Computing, 635–646. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804288 

23.  Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A Stage-
based Model of Personal Informatics Systems. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’10), 557–566. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753409 

24.  Wanyu Liu, Bernd Ploderer, and Thuong Hoang. 2015. 
In Bed with Technology: Challenges and Opportunities 
for Sleep Tracking. In Proceedings of the Annual 
Meeting of the Australian Special Interest Group for 
Computer Human Interaction (OzCHI ’15), 142–151. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2838739.2838742 

25.  Deborah Lupton and Annemarie Jutel. 2015. “It”s like 
having a physician in your pocket!’A critical analysis 
of self-diagnosis smartphone apps. Social Science & 
Medicine 133: 128–135. 

26.  Haley MacLeod, Kim Oakes, Danika Geisler, Kay 

Connelly, and Katie Siek. 2015. Rare world: Towards 
technology for rare diseases. In Proceedings of the 

33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, 1145–1154. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702494 

27.  Haley MacLeod, Anthony Tang, and Sheelagh 

Carpendale. 2013. Personal informatics in chronic 
illness management. In Proceedings of Graphics 
Interface 2013, 149–156. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2532155 

28.  Lena Mamykina, Andrew D. Miller, Elizabeth D. 

Mynatt, and Daniel Greenblatt. 2010. Constructing 
identities through storytelling in diabetes management. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, 1203–1212. 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1753507 

29.  Lena Mamykina, Elizabeth Mynatt, Patricia Davidson, 

and Daniel Greenblatt. 2008. MAHI: Investigation of 
Social Scaffolding for Reflective Thinking in Diabetes 
Management. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI ’08), 477–486. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357131 

30.  John McCarthy and Peter Wright. 2004. Technology as 

experience. interactions 11, 5: 42–43. 

31.  James McIninch, Shoibal Datta, Pronabesh 

DasMahapatra, Emil Chiauzzi, Rishi Bhalerao, Alicia 
Spector, Sherrie Goldstein, Liz Morgan, and Jane 
Relton. 2015. Remote Tracking of Walking Activity in 
MS Patients in a Real-World Setting (P3.209). 
Neurology 84, 14 Supplement: P3.209. 

32.  Cecily Morrison, Peter Culmer, Helena Mentis, and 

Tamar Pincus. 2014. Vision-based body tracking: 
turning Kinect into a clinical tool. Disability and 
Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology: 1–5. 
https://doi.org/10.3109/17483107.2014.989419 

33.  Joseph W. Newbold, Nadia Bianchi-Berthouze, 

Nicolas E. Gold, Ana Tajadura-Jiménez, and Amanda 
CdC Williams. 2016. Musically Informed Sonification 
for Chronic Pain Rehabilitation: Facilitating Progress 
& Avoiding Over-doing. In Proceedings of the 2016 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, 5698–5703. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858302 

34.  Francisco Nunes, Nervo Verdezoto, Geraldine 

Fitzpatrick, Morten Kyng, Erik Grönvall, and Cristiano 
Storni. 2015. Self-Care Technologies in HCI: Trends, 
Tensions, and Opportunities. ACM Trans. Comput.-
Hum. Interact. 22, 6: 33:1–33:45. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2803173 

35.  Johanna Renny Octavia, Karin Coninx, and Peter Feys. 

2012. As i am not you: accommodating user diversity 
through adaptive rehabilitation training for multiple 
sclerosis patients. In Proceedings of the 24th 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA690041.  Layal Shammas, Tom Zentek, Birte von Haaren, 

Stefan Schlesinger, Stefan Hey, and Asarnusch Rashid. 
2014. Home-based system for physical activity 
monitoring in patients with multiple sclerosis (Pilot 
study). BioMedical Engineering OnLine 13, 1: 1–15. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1475-925X-13-10 

42.  Cristiano Storni. 2013. Design challenges for 

ubiquitous and personal computing in chronic disease 
care and patient empowerment: a case study rethinking 
diabetes self-monitoring. Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing 18, 5: 1277–1290. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-013-0707-6 

43.  Kenneth A. Wallston, Barbara Strudler Wallston, 
Shelton Smith, and Carolyn J. Dobbins. 1987. 
Perceived control and health. Current Psychology 6, 1: 
5–25. 

44.  T. J. Yun, H. Y. Jeong, H. R. Lee, R. I. Arriaga, and G. 
D. Abowd. 2010. Assessing asthma management 
practices through in-home technology probes. In 2010 
4th International Conference on Pervasive Computing 
Technologies for Healthcare, 1–9. 
https://doi.org/10.4108/ICST.PERVASIVEHEALTH2
010.8839 

Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference, 
424–432. http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2414603 

36.  Aisling Ann O’Kane, Yvonne Rogers, and Ann E. 
Blandford. 2015. Concealing or Revealing Mobile 
Medical Devices?: Designing for Onstage and Offstage 
Presentation. In Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM 
conference on human factors in computing systems, 
1689–1698. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702453 

37.  Francesco Pagnini, Katherine Bercovitz, and Ellen 
Langer. 2016. Perceived control and mindfulness: 
Implications for clinical practice. Journal of 
Psychotherapy Integration 26, 2: 91. 

38.  Sun Young Park and Yunan Chen. 2015. Individual 

and Social Recognition: Challenges and Opportunities 
in Migraine Management. In Proceedings of the 18th 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work; Social Computing (CSCW ’15), 1540–1551. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675248 

39.  Lukasz Piwek, David A. Ellis, Sally Andrews, and 
Adam Joinson. 2016. The Rise of Consumer Health 
Wearables: Promises and Barriers. PLOS Med 13, 2: 
e1001953. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1001953 

40.  John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and 

Matthew Chalmers Chalmers. 2014. Personal Tracking 
As Lived Informatics. In Proceedings of the 32Nd 
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI ’14), 1163–1172. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557039 

Personal Informatics & Self-TrackingCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA6901 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
