Quantified Factory Worker: Designing a Worker Feedback 
Dashboard 

Päivi Heikkilä 
Technical Research Center of 
Finland Ltd. 
Tampere, Finland 
paivi.heikkila@vtt.fi 

Anita Honka 
Technical Research Center of 
Finland Ltd. 
Tampere, Finland 
anita.honka@vtt.fi 

Eija Kaasinen 
Technical Research Center of 
Finland Ltd. 
Tampere, Finland 
eija.kaasinen@vtt.fi 

problem-solving  [4].  Already  now,  operating  a  highly 
automated  manufacturing  machine  requires  independent 
problem-solving  skills,  as  a  single  worker  may  be 
responsible for a whole machine, and has to be able to handle 
problem situations quickly to avoid or minimise idle time in 
manufacturing.  

The changing nature of factory work creates a need to receive 
feedback on one’s performance and consider new aspects of 
workers’  well-being.  As  one  solution,  we  introduce  the 
concept  of  a  Worker  Feedback  Dashboard,  which  aims  to 
empower  workers  by  raising  self-awareness  of 
their 
performance and well-being. Worker Feedback Dashboard is 
envisioned  as  a  personal  digital  application,  which 
aggregates  and  presents  automatically  tracked  personal 
metrics regarding work performance and well-being for each 
to  workers,  and  highlights 
work  shift  as  feedback 
improvements in personal performance. The concept of the 
Worker Feedback Dashboard originates from the Quantified 
Self  approach,  which  promotes  self-knowledge  and  self-
improvements  through  numbers  acquired  with  the  help  of 
technology,  such  as  wearables  and  mobile  devices.  The 
ideology  aims  at  providing  insightful  personal  data,  which 
has the potential to lead to positive behavioural changes [3].  

Following  the  Quantified  Self  trend,  wearing  self-tracking 
devices  for  monitoring  personal  well-being  has  become 
increasingly common in everyday use [see e.g. 22]. Recently, 
the  number  of  trials  of  self-tracking  well-being  metrics  at 
work have also increased, but the impacts have not yet been 
systematically studied [2, 18]. As self-tracking at work is a 
relatively  new  concept  and  involves  a  variety  of  ethical 
issues  [16,  18],  it  is  especially  important  to  involve  the 
workers themselves in the development of new self-tracking 
solutions.  In  this  study,  we  first  interviewed  the  factory 
workers  on  their  initial  reactions  to  our  concept  idea,  and 
later, we collected their feedback to the designed prototype 
concretizing  the  concept.  In  addition  to  involving  users, 
paying attention to the user experience (UX) of work systems 
is important, as a way the user feels about using a system also 
shapes the image of oneself as a professional [9]. 

In this paper, the research questions are: 
1)  What  kind of  user experience should be  targeted  to in 
solutions  providing  meaningful  self-tracking  and 
production feedback for factory workers, and what kinds 

skills 

is  changing 
problem-solving 

ABSTRACT 
towards  knowledge  work, 
Factory  work 
demanding 
and  managing 
complexity.  Providing  factory  workers  the  possibility  to 
receive  meaningful  self-tracking  feedback  at  work,  could 
empower them to cope better with the increasing complexity 
of  their  work.  We  apply  the  Quantified  Self  approach  to 
factory work by introducing the concept and prototype of a 
Worker  Feedback  Dashboard,  which  presents  various 
automatically  tracked  well-being  and  work  performance 
metrics  to  workers.  Based  on  user  interviews,  we  created 
user experience goals for the Dashboard, and identified the 
following design implications:  Keep positive (but truthful), 
Give  personal  feedback,  Enable  reflection,  and  Do  not 
disturb the worker. After designing the prototype, we studied 
its  user  acceptance.  Even  though  the  interviewed  factory 
workers’ first reactions to tracking personal metrics at work 
were  rather  negative,  the  attitudes  became  more  positive 
after  presenting  the  prototype.  The  results  encourage 
implementing the Worker Feedback Dashboard prototype to 
a functional application. 

Author Keywords 
well-being; factory workers; Quantified Self; human-
centred design, Operator 4.0  

ACM Classification Keywords 
CCS  -  Human-centered  computing  -  Human  computer 
interaction (HCI). 

INTRODUCTION 
The  fourth  industrial  revolution,  enabled  by  advanced 
digitalization and other technologies, is assumed to change 
work on factory floor to resemble knowledge work, making 
the work more interesting and meaningful but also creating 
demands in terms of managing complexity, abstraction and 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this 
work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee 
provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or 
commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full 
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work 
owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with 
credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on 
servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 

NordiCHI'18, September 29-October 3, 2018, Oslo, Norway  
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6437-9/18/09…$15.00  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3240167.3240187 

Paste the appropriate copyright/license statement here. ACM now supports 
three different publication options: 

  ACM copyright: ACM holds the copyright on the work. This is the 

historical approach. 

  License:  The  author(s)  retain  copyright,  but  ACM  receives  an 

exclusive publication license. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
of design implications does the targeted user experience 
have? 

2)  What  is  the  user  acceptance  of  the  Worker  Feedback 
Dashboard  prototype,  which  provides  feedback  of  the 
worker’s well-being and work performance in a factory 
context? 

The  targeted  user  experience  was  concretised  as  UX  goals 
that  were  created  based  on  the  results  of  user  studies  with 
factory workers, discussions with our industrial partner and 
principles  of  the  Quantified  Self  approach.  They  were  the 
basis  for  design  implications  that  were  utilised  when 
designing  the  Worker  Feedback  Dashboard  prototype.  The 
second research question is addressed by examining the user 
acceptance of the prototype by engaging factory workers and 
other key stakeholders in a participatory design process. 

This study is a part of a wider research project (Factory2Fit) 
aiming to create empowering and engaging digital solutions 
to factory floor workers. The Worker Feedback Dashboard 
solution specifically aims to empower workers by providing 
them  with  new  data-based  information  on  their  well-being 
and work performance.  

The  paper  first  presents  related  research  and  two  key 
concepts:  Quantified  Self  and  Operator  4.0.  Second,  it 
describes our design process, methods and participants. The 
results define the central findings related to factory workers 
needs  and  concerns  regarding 
the  Worker  Feedback 
list  our  UX  goals  and  design 
Dashboard  concept, 
implications, and introduce the prototype of the concept. In 
the  discussion 
the  practical 
section,  we  highlight 
implications and ethical questions related to the topic. 

RELATED RESEARCH 

Quantified  Self:  From  Meaningful  Insights  to  Positive 
Changes 
The  term  Quantified  Self  refers  to  self-monitoring  of 
biological, physical, behavioural, or environmental data [28]. 
The term became known after Gary Wolf and Kevin Kelly 
launched  the  Quantifiedself.com  website  for  sharing  self-
tracking practices in 2007. The term refers to the practice and 
trend  of  self-tracking  and  to  the  international  community. 
The website is still in active use, but the trend has expanded. 
An increasing number of people practice self-tracking, using 
commercial wearable devices. For example, around 25% of 
Americans  own  a  wearable  wrist  device  for  tracking  their 
well-being  and  behaviour  [22].  The  trend  of  recording 
personal  data  for  gaining  self-knowledge  has  also  been 
described using other terms such as lifelogging [see more in 
5, 27], personal informatics [15] and personal analytics [17].  

though 

the  Quantified  Self 

Even 
trend  has  become 
increasingly  popular  during  the  last  ten  years  among  both 
consumers  and  workplaces,  most  of  the  studies  on  self-
tracking  have  only  focused  on  the  active  members  of  the 
Quantified  Self  community  [3,  19],  web  forums  related  to 
self-monitoring  [15]  or  early  adopters,  for  example  sport 
enthusiasts  or  users  of  several  trackers  [24].  Nevertheless, 

these  studies  have  revealed  some  user  experience-related 
aspects and usage barriers that are likely to be applicable to 
a wider group of users. 

Based on the analysis of the video posts of quantified selfers, 
Choe et al. [3] found that the common pitfalls in self-tracking 
included  tracking  too  many  things,  which  led  to  tracking 
fatigue, and not tracking triggers or context, which acted as 
a barrier to meaningful insights. Oh and Lee [19] studied the 
user  experience  issues  of  self-tracking  tools  used  by 
quantified selfers based on the content posted on their web 
forum.  The  identified  user  experience  issues  included  the 
controllability and integration of the data, data accuracy, data 
visualisations  and  simplicity  of  user  input.  Li  et  al.  [15] 
identified barriers related to self-tracking based on the survey 
and interview data of self-trackers. These data showed that 
the  main  barriers  to  self-tracking  were  lack  of  time, 
insufficient  motivation  and  forgetting  to  self-track.  The 
barriers to reflection on the data included lack of time, lack 
of  visualisations,  scattered  data,  and  missing  context 
information.  

The  studies  of  early  adopters  emphasise  the  need  for 
visualisations  and  the  data’s  context  information.  Pantzar 
and  Ruckenstein  [20]  also  found  in  their  study  that  data 
visualisations made the data more meaningful for the study 
participants, by proving the impressions they had had before, 
or  demonstrating  non-anticipated  findings.  Seeing  graphs 
was motivating and gratifying. For example, the participants 
felt  that  housework  activities  gained  a  new  value  because 
they contributed positively to the exercise and heart rate data. 
Data  visualisations  proved  and  supported  this,  evoking 
satisfaction and a sense of accomplishment. 

The  goal  of  the  Quantified  Self  movement  is  to  gain 
meaningful insights based on personal data, which then lead 
to positive changes in behaviour [3]. Recording everyday life 
offers ‘a possibility of breaking bad habits and turning one’s 
life for the better’ [27]. The goal is the same, whether self-
tracking  is  practised  during  one’s  free  time  or  at  work.  In 
general,  the  data  tracked  by  wearable  devices  have  the 
potential  to  provide  personalised,  immediate  and  objective 
feedback [21]. According to a study by Rooksby et al. [24], 
the motivations for self-tracking can vary from goal-driven 
tracking  to  documentary  and  diagnostic  tracking,  or  to 
collecting  rewards  or  fetishised  tracking.  Even  though  the 
number of experiments related to self-tracking at work has 
expanded during the last years [18], long-lasting impacts of 
the trials have not been reported [2, 18].  

For  gaining  meaningful 
insights  and  even  positive 
behavioural changes, the design of the self-tracking devices 
and applications plays a critical role. In this study, we aim to 
design an acceptable, interesting and useful solution to self-
tracking in a factory context. 

Operator 4.0 
The fourth industrial revolution, often referred to as Industry 
4.0, is already on its way, enabled by advanced digitalisation, 

 
 
 
 
the  industrial  internet  and  novel  interaction  tools  such  as 
augmented and virtual reality [12]. For factory floor workers 
the  industrial  change  brings  opportunities  to  make  work 
more interesting and meaningful but also creates demands in 
terms  of  managing  complexity,  abstraction  and  problem-
solving [4]. Operator 4.0 refers to smart and skilled operators 
of  the  future,  who  are  assisted  by  automated  systems  that 
provide  sustainable  relief  from  physical  and  mental  stress 
and  let  the  operators  utilise  and  develop  their  creative, 
innovative and improvisational skills without compromising 
production objectives [23].  

Operator 4.0 factory work will be qualitatively enriched and 
flexible  and  will  require  new  qualifications  to  master  the 
digital technology invading factories. Future factories should 
support  current  workers  in  learning  new  skills  as  well  as 
tempt  new  workers  who  are  already  familiar  with  digital 
solutions.  Operators’  physical,  sensory  and  cognitive 
capabilities evolve over time, but these capabilities may also 
vary  according  to  the  work  context  [23].  According  to 
Hackman and Oldham [6], one important factor influencing 
job motivation is keeping employees aware of how well they 
perform in their work. Thus, for work motivation, it would 
be  important  to  receive  feedback  on  personal  performance 
and  competence  development,  but  in  work,  which  is 
becoming  increasingly  automated,  this  kind  of  feedback  is 
not readily available.  

DESIGN PROCESS, METHODS AND PARTICIPANTS 

Participatory Design Process 
Our  design  process  followed  a  human-centred  design 
approach [8], and the principles of the participatory design 
process, in which users and possibly other stakeholders are 
involved in the design [14, 25]. The design process began by 
gaining  an  understanding  of  factory  work,  the  working 
context  and  the  workers’  initial  attitudes  towards  self-
tracking. In addition to the factory workers, the process also 
involved the  management of  the  factories  in  terms of their 
expectations, potential concerns and practical issues.  

Based on the knowledge gained, we created the first version 
of  the  Worker  Feedback  Dashboard  concept.  The  concept 
design was based on UX goals, that concretise the intended 
emotions  or  experiences  that  the  solution  is  targeted  to 
awake. Concrete, focused and shared UX goals help creating 
and  maintaining  UX  mindset  within  the  design  team  [9]. 
Kaasinen et al. [9] propose UX goals to guide the design of 
industrial systems. UX goal setting integrates the viewpoints 
of  different  stakeholders,  thus  committing  them  to  the 
defined  UX  goals  and  emphasizing  user  experience  as  a 
strategic design decision. In  our study,  we defined the  UX 
goals  based  on  the  results  of  the  user  studies,  discussions 
with our industrial partner and principles of the Quantified 
Self approach. UX goals were used to concretise the targeted 
user  experience,  and  they  were  interpreted  into  design 
implications  as  suggested  by  Roto  et  al.  [25].  The  derived 
design  implications  guided  our  design  of  the  Dashboard 
prototype.  

The user acceptance of the Worker Feedback Dashboard was 
studied  by  introducing  the  designed  prototype  to  factory 
workers,  who  could  express  their  feedback  and  further 
improvement ideas to it. After this, the prototype was revised 
according to the feedback.   

Data Collection Methods and Participants 
The  first  part  of  the  study  was  conducted  as  individual 
factory  worker  interviews  including  several  themes.  The 
relevant  theme  for  this  paper  was  the  workers’  initial 
attitudes towards wearing a self-tracking fitness device and 
receiving  well-being  and  performance  metrics  as  feedback 
during the workday. In addition, we asked the interviewees 
what kind of feedback they currently receive of their work. 
The  1–1.5  hours  of  semi-structured 
interviews  were 
conducted  in  a  meeting  room  at  the  factory  by  two 
researchers; one mainly led the interview and the other made 
notes  and  posed  additional  questions.  The  interviews  were 
audio  recorded.  The  interviews  were  complemented  with 
observations,  where  the  researchers  visited  the  actual 
workplace  of  the  interviewees  and  observed  their  work,  to 
obtain  a  contextual  understanding  of  their  tasks,  work 
practices, the problem situations that occur, and the factory 
environment [see more about the context information in 10]. 

In this first part of the study,  we interviewed altogether 13 
factory  workers  from  two  factories  of  metal  industry 
(referred to Factory A and Factory B). The interviewees were 
working  in  different  roles:  6  as  machine  operators,  4  in 
managerial positions and 3 as development engineers. All the 
machine  operators  used  a  modern,  highly  automated, 
multipurpose  manufacturing  machine,  which  required 
problem-solving 
the  complex 
skills  and  managing 
production process. The two factories were customers of our 
industrial partner, and this partner proposed these factories 
to the study. The interviewees were chosen to the interview 
based on their availability during our factory visits.  

The  involved  factory  workers  can  be  seen  as  early 
representatives of the Operator 4.0 vision [23]. Even though 
also  the  managerial  personnel  were  interviewed  to  gain  an 
overall  picture  of  the  manufacturing  process  and  factory 
work, the interviews of the machine operators provided the 
main material for the user requirements related to the concept 
development. 

In  the  second  part  of  the  study,  after  creating  the  first 
prototype  of  the  Worker  Feedback  Dashboard  concept,  we 
introduced  the  first  draft  to  five  machine  operators  of  the 
same  two  factories  who  worked  with  the  same  machinery 
(one was also interviewed in the earlier theme interview). To 
three operators, the concept was explained as part of a wider 
1.5-hour interview, and to two operators, it was elaborated in 
more  detail  in  a  one-hour  feedback/co-design  session 
dedicated to the concept. We also introduced the draft to a 
production manager and a development engineer of Factory 
A, where the management also wanted to participate in the 
design process.  

 
a 

numeric 

The  second  part  of  the  study  focused  on  the  participant’s 
overall  feelings  towards  the  concept,  their  view  on  the 
relevant/irrelevant and potentially missing metrics, and their 
ideas  for  improvements.  In  addition,  we  studied  user 
acceptance  with 
feedback 
five-scale 
questionnaire.  The  questionnaire  included  five  statements  
measuring 1) whether the content was easy to understand, 2) 
whether  it  is  was  interesting,  3)  whether  the  data  seemed 
personally valuable, 4) whether the appearance of the views 
was pleasant, and 5) whether the use of this kind of app raised 
any  doubts.  The  evaluated  aspects  were  based  on  the 
dimensions of the Technology Acceptance Model for Mobile 
Services 
indicating 
acceptability were ease of adoption and use (S1), value (S2-
3) and trust (S5).In addition, we had a UX question about the 
pleasantness of the appearance of the main view, as it is easy 
to evaluate already before using the solution. 

[11].  The  dimensions 

(TAMM) 

In both phases of the study, the participants were emphasized 
that the participation is truly voluntary, and they signed the 
informed  consent  form.  The  personal  data  was  treated 
confidentially in all research  phases, and anonymised after 
the data collection. 

Data Analysis 
The  data  from  the  first  interviews  and  observations  were 
analysed qualitatively. To form a common understanding of 
the findings, two researchers first separately read through the 
interview data, and then jointly analysed them. The relevant 
pieces  of  data  were  identified  and  organised  to  form  data-
driven themes. The analysis of the wider interviews followed 
the  principles  of  creating  an  affinity  diagram,  an  analysis 
phase  of  the  contextual  design  method  [1].  The  initial 
attitudes  towards  self-tracking  at  work  and  receiving 
feedback on it, as well as the comments on current feedback 
of one’s work were analysed. In the second part of the study, 
the findings of the feedback/co-design sessions were jointly 
analysed  by  two  researchers.  The  quantitative  data  of 
feedback  questionnaires  were  used  to  complement  the 
qualitative analysis. 

RESULTS 
In the following, we first describe the factory workers’ initial 
reactions to the idea of practising self-tracking at work and 
receiving feedback on it. Then, we present the identified UX 
goals  and  design  implications,  the  design  of  the  Worker 
Feedback  Dashboard  concept,  the  feedback  received  from 
the factory workers, and the revisions made to the design on 
the basis of the feedback.   

Workers’  Initial  Reactions  towards  Tracking  Personal 
Metrics at Work 
When the interviewed factory workers were introduced to the 
idea  of  self-tracking  at  work,  they  had  mixed,  but  mainly 
negative  initial  reactions  towards  it.  They  associated  the 
personal 
the 
the 
workplace’s 
effectiveness  of  their  manufacturing  work.  In  their  work, 
performance is typically reported in negative measures, such 

feedback  based  on  self-tracking  with 
to 

current  measurements 

related 

as the number of errors or the waiting time of the machine, 
and  thus  they  associated  also  self-tracking  with  receiving 
negative feedback. The first comment of one operator was: 
‘Uhh. You get enough [negative] feedback already now’. 

Despite the mainly negative first impressions, obtaining data 
on one’s stress level at work (e.g. based on heart rate) was 
seen as a  somewhat  interesting. However,  the  majority did 
not  see  the  value  of  self-monitoring  for  themselves,  and 
seemed to be worried about why the data was to be collected. 
One of the workers pointed out that the form of the feedback 
is also important: ‘If you are frustrated and get a notification 
that you need to relax, you’ll get even more frustrated’.   

When  the  workers  told  about  factors  having  an  impact  on 
their  job  satisfaction,  the  key  factor  seemed  to  be  high 
productivity of the work, which was appreciated also by the 
management. The operators explained that they enjoy their 
work most when the machinery works without disturbances: 
‘The  best  thing  is  when  the  machine  rocks’.  This  provides 
direct feedback on the productivity of work. Even though the 
workers  made  efforts 
the 
to  avoid 
manufacturing process, they felt that the management did not 
acknowledge or appreciate their efforts. They remarked that 
it  was  not  typical  to  receive positive  feedback:  ‘You  never 
get to hear thanks from others, but when you make a mistake, 
you hear it right away’.  

interruptions 

to 

Some  of  the  workers  were  in  the  habit  of  checking  the 
statistics  related  to  machine  usage  time  in  the  reports 
produced  of  the  machine  flow,  but  these  data  were  not 
interesting to all workers. It seemed that the information on 
the  reports  was  more  relevant  for  the  management,  as  it 
offered  an  overall  picture  of  the  manufacturing  and 
highlighted  any  problems.  For  workers,  more personal and 
encouraging  information  would  have  more  potential  to  be 
beneficial and interesting.  

Designing  the  First  Prototype  of  the  Worker  Feedback 
Dashboard 
Based on the understanding of the factory workers’ working 
context  and  their  initial  reactions  towards  self-tracking  at 
work,  we  designed  the  first  prototype  of  the  Worker 
Feedback  Dashboard.  The  ideology  of  Quantified  Self 
movement and the Operator 4.0 vision were also applied in 
designing the prototype.   

Based on the results of the user interviews, we first set the 
following UX goals for the Worker Feedback Dashboard. 

1)  Being  empowered  and  encouraged.  The  workers  felt 
that  they  did  not  get  much  positive  feedback  on  their 
efforts, and were afraid that self-tracking would lead to 
increased  negative 
feedback.  To  encourage  and 
empower  workers,  the  dashboard  should  highlight  the 
positive changes and accomplishments of the workday. 
To be valuable to the workers, this feedback still needs 
to be truthful. 

2)  Getting  personal  feedback.  To  enable  striving  for 
positive  changes  in  one’s  work  practices  or  in  factors 

related  to  one’s  well-being,  the  feedback  needs  to  be 
based  on  personal  data.  This  offers  the  possibility  to 
have an impact on the factors tracked and the possibility 
to  see  one’s  development  in  work  tasks.  Personal 
feedback  means also that only the  workers themselves 
can  access  the  data,  which  is  in  accordance  with  the 
Quantified Self approach. 

We also defined two additional UX goals based on the key 
principle of the Quantified Self approach and the nature of 
factory floor work.  

3)  Getting meaningful insight. According to the Quantified 
Self  approach,  meaningful  insights  require  personal 
reflection  on  the  data.  Different  types  of  data  may  be 
valuable  and  interesting  to  different  users.  The  design 
should offer the possibility to combine different types of 
data to enable the discovery of meaningful connections 
and trends. The user should feel making self-discoveries 
by linking different types of data to each other. 

4)  Being  undisturbed.  The  solution  needs  to  be  quickly 
interpreted  and  must  not  take  too  much  time  from 
working or distract from work tasks. This is important 
for  any  kind  of  work,  but  factory  work  specifically 
requires  attentive  monitoring  of  machinery  and  quick 
reaction  to  problems.  This  is  important  for  both 
productive manufacturing as well as for ensuring safety 
at the factory. The user should feel being fully able to 
concentrate on the workflow. 

The UX goals were interpreted to four design implications: 
1) Keep positive (but truthful), 2) Give personal feedback, 3) 
Enable personal reflection, and 4) Do not disturb the worker. 
In  the  next  section,  we  describe  how  these  implications 
influenced the design.  

Overview of the First Prototype 
The  Worker  Feedback  Dashboard  was  designed  to  include 
both well-being and production metrics, and to provide the 
user  with  the  possibility  to  discover  connections  between 
these,  such  as  the  relation  between  sleep,  mood  and 
achievements  at  work.  The  feedback  is  intended  for  the 
personal  use  of  the  worker,  and  not  to  be  shared  with 
management or other employees. The feedback is presented 
visually via various graphs and charts, and it is based on data 
that  would  be  collected  automatically  by  a  commercial 
wearable  with  an  open  application  interface,  and  by  the 
manufacturing production system. Well-being data would be 
collected  through  a  wearable  fitness  tracker  used  by  the 
factory worker and the performance metrics would involve 
manufacturing production data that are collected inside the 
factory into its ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning) system.   

Figure  1  shows  the  contents  of  the  main  view  of  the  first 
prototype  of  the  Worker  Feedback  Dashboard.  This  view 
presents an illustration of the data from one day or work shift, 
including well-being metrics, production metrics and a time 
series  graph  that  presents  selected  well-being  metrics 
together  with  certain  work  performance  outcomes.  By 

selecting a specific metric, the user can see its evolvement as 
a trend view. 

The  well-being  metrics  include  parameters  that  can  be 
automatically  tracked  by  commercial  wearable  fitness 
trackers and the mood during the work day, as a self-reported 
measure.  The  mood  information  was  included  to  enable  a 
general  evaluation  of  the  user’s  feelings  and  to  encourage 
users engage with the Dashboard. Step count at work, sleep 
duration of the previous sleeping period and the resting heart 
rate for the day were selected as other well-being metrics to 
be shown in the Dashboard.  

The production metrics selected include the machine running 
time (utilisation rate of the machine), the longest continuous 
running period during the work shift, the recovery time after 
failures  (the  time  taken  to  resolve  the  error  situation),  and 
achievements (number of finished orders and manufactured 
parts) during the shift. The time series graph shows the state 
of  the  machine  (running,  idle/waiting  or  failure)  together 
with the data on the user’s heart rate and steps. We selected 
these production metrics as they mirror the importance of the 
manufacturing  without  interruptions  and  quick  solving  of 
problems, which are the key objectives of the operators.  

Figure 1. Main view of the first prototype of Worker Feedback 
Dashboard. 

The  design  implications  influenced  the  design  in  the 
following way: 

1)  Keep positive (but truthful). The production metrics of 
the work are designed to highlight the positive aspects 
and  achievements  of  the  workday.  Instead  of  the 

 
 
machine idle time or the number or duration of failures, 
the  data  highlights  the  periods  of  fluent  work.  The 
number of finished orders and manufactured parts may 
enhance  the  worker’s  feeling  of  achievement.  The 
positive development of the metrics is indicated to the 
user with small arrows besides the metric.  

the  development 

2)  Give personal feedback. The feedback is intended to be 
such that the workers can have an impact on it, and see 
their  development  related  to  their  work  tasks.  Thus,  it 
demonstrates 
in  one’s  work 
competence.  The  feedback  may  also  include  more 
sensitive  well-being  related  data,  as  they  are  not 
accessible  by  the  employer  or  managers.  Still,  the 
employees will be offered a possibility to select which 
data  is  shown  in  the  Dashboard  and  exclude  data  that 
they find too sensitive or irrelevant. 

3)  Enable  personal  reflection.  The  Dashboard  shows  the 
selected data and highlights positive accomplishments, 
but  the  user  needs  to  discover  the  personally  relevant 
relations  between  the  metrics.  After  longer  use  of  the 
Dashboard, the trend data (not visible in the main view) 
supports  finding  meaningful  relationships  related  to 
one’s  behaviour  and  the  metrics.  In  addition  to 
automatically  collected  data,  self-reporting  of  one’s 
mood  may  drive  the  user  to  think  about  one’s  overall 
feelings  at  least  once  a  day,  and  thus  foster  personal 
reflection. 

4)  Do not disturb the worker. The daily data are shown in 
the main view in such a way that they can be interpreted 
quickly. The idea is that the worker checks the data after 
or at the end of each work shift, or alternatively, during 
breaks  at  work.  The  first  version  shows  only  the 
summary  of  data,  and  does  not  give  any  real-time 
notifications of the user’s state or the machine that could 
disturb  the  worker.  If  the  worker  wants  to  explore  the 
data  in  more  detail,  it  can  be  done  via  any  device 
whenever the user wants, as the Dashboard is intended 
to be accessible as a web service.  

Feedback and Revisions to the First Prototype  
When the first prototype of the Worker Feedback Dashboard 
was  introduced  to  the  factory  workers,  most  of  them 
perceived the idea of wearing a self-monitoring device and 
receiving feedback through the dashboard rather positively. 
Four of the five interviewed workers perceived the concept 
as at least somewhat interesting, especially the data related 
to  heart  rate  and  step  count.  One  interviewee  was  more 
critical  towards  the  idea  and  claimed  that  it  is  ‘everyone’s 
own  business  how  they  live,  sleep  and  eat’,  and  not  the 
employer’s. This may have related to a desire to keep work 
and  free  time  apart.  Even  if  it  was  emphasized  that  the 
measures are for the worker’s personal use only, he seemed 
to  have  an  impression  that  the  data  was  accessible  for  the 
employer.  This  emphasized  the  need  to  ensure  data 
protection and communicate it to the users clearly. The users 
should  have  a  true  freedom  to  choose  not  to  participate  in 
self-tracking  and  if  possible,  to  select  which  metrics  are 

tracked. Even though the reactions were not solely positive, 
the first impressions were clearly more favourable than in the 
first round of interviews.  

interesting.  Of 

the  well-being  parameters, 

In  the  co-design/feedback  sessions,  the  factory  workers 
highlighted which parameters they regarded as the most and 
the 
least 
participants were interested in the data related to their heart 
rate and step count. These users did not perceive the data on 
sleep and mood as very interesting, as they felt that it offered 
no  new  information.  Especially,  self-reporting  of  mood 
information was not seen as being worth the effort. 

Of the production parameters, the participants perceived the 
machine operating time as the most relevant, as this was the 
most  important  parameter  in  production  in  these  factories. 
The  time  for  recovering  from  errors  was  also  seen  as 
interesting, as the current production reports did not directly 
give  this  parameter.  The  number  of  produced  orders  and 
items were not considered very relevant, as the workers felt 
they  could  not  personally  influence  these  metrics.  The 
workers  at  Factory  A  also  discussed  the  possibility  of 
including the utilisation percentage of the metal sheets in the 
production metrics, as the production manager followed this. 
However,  it  was  not  a  personally  relevant  metric  for  the 
workers, as the utilisation percentage realised during one’s 
work  shift  was  often  determined  during  the  previous  work 
shift  by  a  fellow  worker.  The  production  manager  also 
highlighted that including this parameter on the Dashboard 
might  encourage  workers  to  prioritise  this  issue  over  the 
machine running time, which should not happen.   

the  Dashboard  prototype 

According to the numerical feedback (Table 1), the factory 
rather 
workers  perceived 
positively.  The  content  was  considered  easy  to  understand 
and  relatively  interesting,  and  most  of  the  respondents 
regarded it as personally valuable. The question of whether 
the use of this kind of solution raised doubts produced mixed 
responses: two of the five respondents had no doubts about  
the usage, but three saw its use as not completely indubious.   

Feedback item 

Evaluation 
median 

Range of 
evaluations 

Dashboard concept in general 

Clarity of content 

Interestingness of content 

Perceived value of content 

No doubts about usage 

Pleasantness of appearance 

4 

5 

4 

4 

3 

4 

3-4 

4-5 

3-4 

2-5 

2-5 

3-5 

Table 1. Numeric feedback regarding the user acceptance of 
the Dashboard prototype provided by five factory workers. 
Evaluation scale: from 1 = negative to  5 = positive. 

Based on the interviews, the idea of the dashboard seemed 
promising, and we identified no need for major changes in 

the design. However, as the self-reported mood information 
was  not  considered  interesting,  we  decided  to  change  the 
question  related  to  the  user’s  mood  to  a  question  on  their 
attention  (‘How  effortless  did  concentrating  on  your  work 
tasks feel today?’, see Figure 2). In the factory work context, 
the workers’ perceived attention may be a relevant parameter 
to follow, and the users may find reflection on the sleep data, 
for example, interesting.  Even though sleep data was not felt 
specifically  interesting,  we  decided  to  include  it  in  the 
design, as the personal value of it may be revealed later when 
linking it to other data. Furthermore, as working in a night 
shift  is  typical  in  factory  work,  the  sleep  information  may 
prove to be interesting.  

Figure 2. Revised view of well-being metrics. 

Four of  the  five interviewees  were interested in testing the 
Worker  Feedback  Dashboard as  part  of  their  daily  work  if 
they  had  the  opportunity  to  participate.  In  Factory  A,  the 
production management was also willing to participate in the 
pilot.  In  Factory  B,  the  management  was  not  willing  to 
participate, as the manufacturing work had urgent problems 
that  the  company  needed  to  solve  before  undertaking  new 
development projects.  

DISCUSSION 
This  study  explored  the  user  acceptance  of  the  Worker 
Feedback Dashboard concept in a factory context. Through 
a participatory design process, we first created UX goals and 
design  implications  and  then  the  design  solutions  for  the 
concept. The idea of the Worker Feedback Dashboard is in 
line with the Quantified Self trend, as it provides data-based 
feedback  to  factory  workers  to  increase  their  awareness  of 
the  issues  that  influence  their  work  performance  and  well-
being.  The  study  contributes  to  the  existing  literature  by 
increasing  the  understanding  of  the  acceptability  of  self-
tracking at work, especially in a factory floor environment. 
As  many  studies  have  focused  on  the  early  adopters  and 
active  members  of  Quantified  Self  community  [3,  15,  19, 
24], it is important to extend the understanding to less tech-
savvy users and employees who are offered the opportunity 
of  self-tracking  without  being  familiar  with  the  idea  in 
advance. Operator 4.0 factory work [23] offers an interesting 
context for applying quantification data, as it is assumed that 

the  work  of  factory  operators  will  involve  an  increasing 
number of problem-solving situations and complexity in the 
future.  

feedback,  emphasises 

Our first research question  aimed to  identify  the  UX goals 
and  design  implications  for  a  concept  that  provides 
meaningful self-tracking and production feedback to factory 
workers. Based on the user and context requirements as well 
as the Quantified Self trend, we ended up in four key design 
implications. The first, Keep positive (but truthful) highlights 
the  importance  of  positive  feedback.  The  second  design 
implication,  Give  personal 
the 
opportunity  to  offer  personal  feedback,  and  thus  enable 
workers  to  see  their  development  at  work.  The  third 
implication,  Enable  reflection,  refers  to  providing  an 
opportunity  for  the  user  to  find  the  personally  meaningful 
connections of the data. Finally, the fourth implication, Do 
not  disturb  the  worker,  reminds  us  of  the  factory  work 
context, in which it is important that the technical solution 
does not distract the worker from actual work tasks. These 
design  implications  complement  the  current  understanding 
of important user experience issues related to self-tracking, 
such  as  the  benefit  of  visualisations  [15,  19]  and  context 
information  [3,  15],  which  foster  obtaining  meaningful 
insight of the data.   

The second research question focused on the user acceptance 
of  the  Worker  Feedback  Dashboard.  During  the  design 
process,  the  factory  workers  first  perceived  the  idea  of 
measuring  workers  negatively,  but  this  perception  became 
more positive when they could see the actual design and the 
purpose  and  content  of  the  concept.  There  may  be  several 
reasons  for  this.  Generally,  it  is  often  easier  to  accept  less 
ambiguous and more concrete ideas, and engaging with the 
idea may make it more acceptable. However, the result also 
indicates that the design solutions as such were perceived as 
acceptable,  and  the  workers  also  regarded  most  of  the 
features  of  the  concept  as  interesting  and  valuable  for 
themselves.  

Despite  the  rather  positive  feedback,  not  all  the  study 
participants  considered  using 
the  Worker  Feedback 
Dashboard as completely indubious.  As the topic of personal 
measurements at the workplace is a sensitive one, the ethical 
aspects will be considered in the design and evaluation of the 
solution  throughout  the  research  project.  We  will  use  the 
proactive  Ethics  by  Design  approach  [7,  13]  to  create  an 
ethically sustainable solution. In addition, the ethical issues 
and  the  expected  impacts  of  the  solution  will  be  discussed 
with the ethical advisory board of the project.  

initial  understanding  of 

the 
This  study  provides  an 
acceptability of self-tracking concepts in a factory context. 
In our research project, we will further develop the concept 
using the identified design implications, to create a prototype 
with  the  key  features.  The  usage  of  the  prototype  will  be 
studied  in  a  study  with  approximately  twenty  machine 
operators  in  several  factories  including  Factory  A  of  this 
study.  When  recruiting  the  study  participants,  we  will  pay 

 
specific  attention  to  the  ethical  issues,  such  as  the  true 
voluntariness of participation and  protecting the privacy of 
the user data. 

The limitations of this study derive from its explorative and 
initial nature and the small number of participants. However, 
we expect the qualitative data of the thoughts of the factory 
workers, the identified design implications and the suggested 
design  solutions  to  provide  value  to  the  HCI  (human-
computer  interaction)  community.  Even  though  this  study 
focuses on factory work, the design implications and a part 
of the design solutions are applicable to other occupations as 
well.  As  the  quantification  of  the  workers  is  a  new  and 
significant topic, we hope that in the future, other studies will 
also focus on the ethical aspects, design alternatives and user 
perspective of this subject.  

CONCLUSION 
This study sheds light on the  acceptability of a concept for 
providing personal production and self-tracking feedback to 
factory floor  workers. The results  encourage  implementing 
the introduced Worker Feedback  Dashboard prototype to a 
functional  application.  In  broader  scope, 
the  results 
encourage  the  design  of  self-tracking  systems  for  workers 
and involving workers in the design process. We hope that 
the  identified  UX  goals  and  design  implications  provide 
useful  guidance  for  practitioners  and  inspire  the  HCI 
community members working on the area of quantification 
or self-tracking at workplaces. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This project has received funding from the European Union’s 
Horizon  2020  research  and  innovation  programme  under 
grant agreement No 723277 (project Factory2Fit). We thank 
all the factory workers and stakeholders who participated in 
the participatory design process. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Hugh Beyer and Karen Holtzblatt. 1997. Contextual 

design: defining customer-centered systems. Elsevier. 

2.  Kathryn Buchanan and Dan Lockton. 2015. 

Understanding human connectivity and the Quantified 
Self. Working Papers of the Sustainable Society 
Network+. 

3.  Eun K. Choe, Nicole B. Lee, Bongshin Lee, Wanda 
Pratt, and Julie A. Kientz. 2014. Understanding 
quantified-selfers' practices in collecting and exploring 
personal data. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM 
conference on Human factors in computing systems, 
1143-1152. 

4.  Dominic Gorecky, Mathias Schmitt, Matthias Loskyll, 
and Detlef Zühlke. 2014. Human-machine-interaction 
in the industry 4.0 era. In Industrial Informatics 
(INDIN), 2014 12th IEEE International Conference on 
Industrial Informatics (INDIN), IEEE, 289-294. 

5.  Cathal Gurrin, Alan F. Smeaton, and Aiden R. 
Doherty. 2014. Lifelogging: Personal big 

data. Foundations and Trends® in Information 
Retrieval 8, 1: 1-125. 

6.  Richard J. Hackman and Greg R. Oldham. 1975. 

Development of the job diagnostic survey. Journal of 
Applied psychology 60, 2: 159. 

7.  Veikko Ikonen, Eija Kaasinen, and Marketta Niemelä. 

2009. Defining Ethical Guidelines for Ambient 
Intelligence Applications on a Mobile Phone. 
Intelligent Environments (Workshops), 261-268. 

8. 

ISO 9241-210: 2010. Ergonomics of human system 
interaction-Part 210: Human-centred design for 
interactive systems. International Standardization 
Organization (ISO). Switzerland. 

9.  Eija Kaasinen, Virpi Roto, Jaakko Hakulinen, Tomi 

Heimonen, Jussi PP Jokinen, Hannu Karvonen, Tuuli 
Keskinen et al. 2015. Defining user experience goals to 
guide the design of industrial systems. Behaviour & 
Information Technology 34, 10: 976-991. 

10.  Eija Kaasinen, Franziska Schmalfuß, Cemalettin 
Özturk, Susanna Aromaa, Menouer Boubekeuer, 
Juhani Heilala, Päivi Heikkilä, Timo Kuula et al. 2018. 
Empowering industrial workers with engaging factory 
adaptation solutions. Submitted to Computers & 
Industrial Engineering.  

11.  Eija Kaasinen. 2009. User Acceptance of Mobile 
Services. International Journal of Mobile Human 
Computer Interaction 1, 1: 79–97. 

12.  Henning Kagermann, Wolfgang Wahlster, and 

Johannes Helbig. 2013. Securing the future of German 
manufacturing industry. Recommendations for 
implementing the strategic initiative INDUSTRIE 4.0, 
final report of the Industrie 4.0 Working Group, 
Forschungsunion. 

13.  Eleni Kosta, Olli Pitkänen, Marketta Niemelä, and Eija 
Kaasinen. 2010. Mobile-centric ambient intelligence in 
health- and homecare-anticipating ethical and legal 
challenges. Science and Engineering Ethics 16, 2: 303-
323. 

14.  Sarah Kuhn and Michael J. Muller. 1993. Participatory 
design. Communications of the ACM 36, 6: 24-29. 

15.  Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A stage-
based model of personal informatics systems. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, 557-566. 

16.  Deborah Lupton. 2016. The diverse domains of 
quantified selves: self-tracking modes and 
dataveillance. Economy and Society 45, 1: 101-122. 

17.  MIT Technology Review: Stephen Wolfram on 

Personal Analytics. Retrieved June 19, 2017 from 
https://www.technologyreview.com/s/514356/stephen-
wolfram-on-personal-analytics/ 

18.  Veronica P. Moore, and Lukasz Piwek. 2016. 

Regulating well-being in the brave new quantified 
workplace. Employee Relations 39, 3: 308-316. 

20.  Mika Pantzar and Minna Ruckenstein. 2015. The heart 
of everyday analytics: emotional, material and practical 
extensions in self-tracking market. Consumption 
Markets & Culture 18, 1: 92-109. 

21.  Lukasz Piwek, David A. Ellis, Sally Andrews, and 
Adam Joinson. 2016. The rise of consumer health 
wearables: promises and barriers. PLoS Medicine 13, 2: 
1-9. 

22.  Rock Health. 2016. Digital Health Consumer 

Adoption: Report, December, 2016. 
https://rockhealth.com/reports/digital-health-consumer-
adoption-2016/ 

23.  David Romero, Peter Bernus, Ovidiu Noran, Johan 
Stahre, and Åsa Fast-Berglund. 2016. The Operator 
4.0: human cyber-physical systems & adaptive 
automation towards human-automation symbiosis work 
systems. IFIP International Conference on Advances in 
Production Management Systems, 677-686. Springer, 
Cham. 

19.  Jeungmin Oh and Uichin Lee. 2015. Exploring UX 
issues in Quantified Self technologies. Eighth 
International Conference on Mobile Computing and 
Ubiquitous Networking (ICMU), 53-59. IEEE. 

24.  John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and 
Matthew Chalmers. 2014. Personal tracking as lived 
informatics. Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM 
conference on Human factors in computing systems, 
1163-1172. 

25.  Virpi Roto, Eija Kaasinen, Tomi Heimonen, Hannu 

Karvonen, Jussi PP Jokinen, Petri Mannonen, Hannu 
Nousu et al. 2017. Utilizing Experience Goals in 
Design of Industrial Systems. Proceedings of the 2017 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, 6993-7004. ACM. 

26.  Douglas Schuler and Aki Namioka. eds. 1993. 

Participatory design: Principles and practices. CRC 
Press. 

27.  Stefan Selke, ed. 2016. Lifelogging: Digital self-
tracking and Lifelogging-between disruptive 
technology and cultural transformation. Springer. 

28.  Melanie Swan. 2013. The quantified self: fundamental 
disruption in big data science and biological discovery. 
Big Data 1, 2: 85-99. 

 
 
