QuittyLink: Using Smartphones for Personal Counseling 
to Help People Quit Smoking  

Jeni Paay, Jesper Kjeldskov, Mikael B. Skov, Nirojan Srikandarajah, Umachanger Brinthaparan 
Department of Computer Science / Research Centre for Socio+Interactive Design 
Aalborg University, Aalborg East, Denmark 
{jeni, jesper, dubois}@cs.aau.dk 

ABSTRACT 
We present the design and evaluation of a smartphone app, 
QuittyLink,  designed  to  help  smokers  reduce  or  stop 
smoking.  Smoking  cigarettes  is  a  serious  health  risk  and 
people  who  wish  to  quit  often  struggle  to  do  so.  It  is  well 
known that the most effective method of assisting smoking 
cessation is personal face-to-face counseling. However, this 
approach  is  only  used  by  very  few  people  wishing  to  quit 
for reasons such as inconvenience and personal shyness. In 
response  to  this  we  have  created  an  app  that  provides 
personal  counseling  to  users  on  their  smartphone.  The 
counseling  content  is  authored  by  smoking  cessation 
experts and is based on the user’s personal data and recent 
actual smoking behaviors collected through the smartphone. 
We  deployed  the  QuittyLink  app  with  people  in  their 
everyday lives to study how personal counseling on mobile 
phones would influence their smoking behaviors. We found 
that both the personal counseling and the ability to visualize 
and  reflect  on  their  own  self-tracked  smoking  behaviors 
helped them form strategies to improve their ability to quit. 

Author Keywords 
Smoking cessation; health behavior change; mobile apps; 
personal counseling; self-tracking; interaction design. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI):
Miscellaneous.

INTRODUCTION 
With  the  growing  proliferation  of  mobile  technologies,  we 
are witnessing several mobile applications that support and 
encourage  behavior  change  within  different  domains,  such 
as  physical  activity,  healthy  eating  and  drinking,  stress 
management, alcohol abuse, smoking cessation, etc. In this 
paper,  we  are  particularly  interested  in  the  use  of  mobile 
technologies  for  supporting  people  in  changing  smoking 
behaviors and, more ideally, quitting entirely. 

Permission to make digital or hard  copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is grante d without fee provided that copies are  
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must b e honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute t o lists, requires prior specific permiss ion 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 

MobileHCI '15, August 24 - 27, 2015, Copenhagen, Denmark  © 2015 
ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3652-9/15/08…$15.00  DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2785830.2785877 

Figure 1. Participant using QuittyLink while smoking 

Smoking  can  impact  personal  health  with  varying  degrees 
of  severity,  with  illnesses  including  cancer,  lung  disease, 
heart disease, and poor blood circulation [15]. Despite this, 
and widespread campaigning against smoking, consumption 
of  tobacco  continues  to  grow,  and  according  to  the  World 
Health  Organization  almost  six  million  people  die  every 
year from smoking-related diseases [22]. Illness and deaths 
from smoking are not only tragic, but also have significant 
economical  costs  for  societies.  As  a  means  of  facilitating 
smoking  cessation,  it  is  well  known  that  personal  face-to-
face  counseling  is  very  effective.  However,  it  is  also  well 
known  that  this  approach  is  not  very  popular  amongst 
potential  quitters  for  reasons  such  as  inconvenience  of 
having  to  be  in  a  specific  place  at  a  specific  time  for  the 
counseling, and shyness of going to a counselor in person.  

In  response  to  this,  we  have  been  exploring  the  use  of 
personal  mobile  technologies,  such  as  smartphones,  for 
facilitating  and  mediating  personal  counseling  in  smoking 
cessation. Personal smartphones are particularly interesting 
as platform for this purpose because of their pervasiveness 
and  hence  the  ability  to  use  them  for  reaching  people  at 
times  and  places  where  they  are  tempted  to  smoke.  They 
they  facilitate  real-time 
are  also 
collection  of  information  about  the  smokers’  context  and 
smoking  habits.  Our  prototype  application,  QuittyLink, 
combines these two into a mobile personal counselor, using 
health behavior change strategies, tailoring its content to the 
individual smokers’ profile, smoking behavior and context, 
and  delivering  it  into  the  users’  own  contexts  rather  than 
requiring them to go to a counseling appointment. 

interesting  because 

In  the  following  we  outline  related  work  and  describe  the 
QuittyLink  app.  We  then  describe  our  field  deployment  of 
the  prototype  with  people  trying  to  quit  smoking,  and 
present and discuss our findings.  

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark98RELATED WORK 
In recent years there has been an increase in interest in the 
use of technology to support health behavior change - both 
in  terms  of  commercial  products  and  research  projects. 
Popular  for  every  day  use  are  the  commercially  available 
wrist  worn  fitness  bands  including  Apple  Watch1,  Fitbit2 
and  Jawbone3.  Each  comes  with  different  options,  but 
common  to  all  is  collecting  and  presenting  data  about  the 
user’s  physical  activity.  Fitbit  Flex  tracks  steps,  distance, 
calories  burned  and  how  much  a  person  has  slept.  Apple 
Watch  Sport  tracks  heart  rate,  physical  movement  and 
calories  burned.  Jawbone  Up  tracks  daily  activity,  calories 
burned,  sleeping  hours,  meals  and  even  has  a  barcode 
scanner  to  record  food  items  consumed.  HCI  research  has 
successfully  explored  the  use  of  tracking  technologies  for 
automated and more accurate data input. Consolvo et al. [4] 
developed  a  prototype  mobile  app  called  Houston  for 
encouraging physical activity by using a pedometer to count 
the steps a person takes each day and presenting this to the 
user on their phone to be shared with others. Chui et al. [3] 
created  a  system  called  Playful  Bottle  to  motivate  office 
workers  to  drink  healthy  quantities  of  water.  This  system 
uses  a  mobile  phone  attached  to  a  drinking  mug.  The 
camera and accelerometer of the phone are used to track the 
amount  and  regularity  of  water  consumed.  Fish’n’Steps, 
created  by  Lin  et  al.  [10]  encourages  physical  activity  by 
growing  virtual  fishes  in  a  fish  tank  the  more  steps  a  user 
takes.  Similarly,  UbiFit  Garden  [5]  uses  a  virtual  flower 
garden  as  a  metaphor  which  grows  as  the  user  is  more 
physically  active,  using  a  fitness  sensing  device  to  track 
activity  and  the  garden  is  then  visualized  on  a  personal 
mobile display. In all of these systems, the activity tracking 
with  subsequent  visualizations  helped  people  understand 
their  health  behavior  changes  and  gave  them  indicators  of 
when they had reached activity goals. 

them 

There  are 
technology 
limited  research  examples  of 
supporting  smoking  cessation.  Early  studies  by  Strecher  et 
al.  [20]  using  computer-tailored  health  letters  to  support 
participants’  smoking  cessation  found 
to  have 
statistically  significant  positive  results  toward  quitting,  in 
an  attempt  to  overcome  the  low  numbers  (less  than  0.5%) 
of  people  who  access  and  are  helped  by  face-to-face 
counseling when quitting [2]. Strecher [19] later confirmed 
that  computer-tailored  content  delivered  through  the  web 
was  more  effective  than  non-tailored  content.  Shiffman  et 
al.  [17]  and  Schuman  [16]  both  confirmed  the  efficacy  of 
computer-generated 
smoking  materials. 
tailored  quit 
Graham  et  al.  [9]  developed  a  web-based  system  called 
QuitCoach  to  provide  quitting  advice  to  users,  tailored  to 
their  quitting  stage,  using  the  Trans  Theoretical  Model  of 

1 https://www.apple.com/watch/ 
2 https://www.fitbit.com 
3 https://jawbone.com 

health  behavior  change  [14].  Among  the  studies  exploring 
the use of mobile technology to support smoking cessation, 
“Txt2stop” by Free et al. [8] found that sending helpful text 
messages to participants doubled their quit rate in the short 
term.  Similarly,  “Distract  Me”  by  Ploderer  et  al.  [13] 
showed  that  distractions  and  tips  on  mobile  phones  could 
keep  users  from  smoking.  Extending  on  these  findings, 
Paay et al. [11] explored how different types of content sent 
to mobile phones could help smokers quit. They found that 
content that relates directly to peoples’ smoking habits were 
most  helpful.  Participants  also  requested  interaction  in  the 
form of contact with a quitline and the tracking of their own 
habits  in  order  to  better  engage  with  the  app.  They  also 
liked  the  smart  phone  as  a  delivery  platform.  In  related 
work,  Paay  et  al.  [12]  found  that  smokers  are  highly 
individual  in  their  approach  to  quitting  and  that  the  help 
required  at  different  stages  of  a  person’s  quitting  attempt 
needs to be tailored to their particular situation and seen as 
specific and relevant to them. 

that  nearly  half  of 

Abroms et al. [1] reviewed 98 apps for Android and iPhone, 
finding 
them  simply  provided 
calculations  based  on  estimates  by  the  user,  and  that  the 
apps  generally  had  low  adherence  to  evidence-based 
practices.  The  problem  with  basing  feedback  on  estimates 
provided by the user, long after the act, is that data is often 
incomplete,  imprecise  and  prone  to  error.  Immediate  and 
automated tracking of cigarettes smoked can solve this.  

THE “QUITTYLINK” APP 
Based on findings from previous studies on health behavior 
change  and  smoking  cessation,  and  the  review  of  existing 
apps, we designed and built the QuittyLink, which uses self-
tracking and system-tracked data about a person’s smoking 
behaviors  to  provide  weekly  personal  counseling  to  their 
mobile device similar to the normal weekly rhythm of many 
in-person smoking cessation counseling programs. We also 
smoking 
provided  visualizations  of 
behaviors, as well as daily motivations and tips, which have 
proven helpful in previous studies [11, 13]. The aim was to 
both  help  people  to  quit  smoking  and  support  them  in 
staying quit.  

their  measured 

QuittyLink  was  developed  as  a  native  application  for  both 
iOS and Android, rather than as a web application, in order 
to  better  exploit  the  technological  advantages  of  the 
smartphone  platform.  Developing  native  applications 
ensured  that  graphics  looked  as  intended,  location-based 
information could be easily recorded, and the app ran faster 
than  a  web-app  delivered  through  a  browser.  We  kept  the 
app  simple  and  fast  to  use,  since  it  was  designed  for  data 
entry  or  browsing  content  while  the  user  was  smoking. 
Making  native  apps  for  the  two  most  popular  platforms 
meant that they could each be designed with respect to the 
design principles of that operating system, taking advantage 
of user’s interactive familiarity with their own phone. 

Contextual  attributes  such  as  time,  place  and  social 
situation can become conditioned cues to smoke. Situations 

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark99 
 
                                                             
in 

trigger  strong  cravings 

are  crucial  in  a  person’s  urge  to  smoke  [21].  Certain 
individuals,  for 
situations 
example,  after  meals,  when  drinking  alcohol  or  coffee, 
when  taking  a  break.  Keeping  track  of  these  triggers  and 
other contextual attributes can increase smoker’s awareness 
of  their  behavioral  patterns  and  assist  them  in  making  and 
maintaining  strategies  to  change.  To  facilitate  this  kind  of 
assistance, our system asks users to register each time they 
smoke  or  resist  a  cigarette  coupled  with  the  triggering 
situation.  The  QuittyLink  system  then  logs  the  time  and 
physical location of the phone when these entries are made. 
By  tracking  smoked  and  resisted  cigarettes  precisely,  and 
presenting  this  data  as  a  set  of  visualizations  on  the  user’s 
phone, they can become more aware of their actual smoking 
patterns. This makes QuittyLink useful to smokers who are 
thinking  of  quitting  or  trying  to  quit,  as  well  as  smokers 
who  are  working  to  stay  quit.  In  doing  this,  we  counteract 
one of the biggest limitations of current apps, that is, most 
are only useful for smokers who have already quit [1]. 

the  privacy  and 

Counseling  has  proven  to  be  highly  effective  in  increasing 
people’s  success  in  quitting  smoking  [19].  Even  so,  many 
people are reluctant to seek it in person, or attend smoking 
cessation  groups  because  they  see  quitting  as  a  private 
matter, or find it inconvenient to attend counseling at a set 
time  and  location  [19].  As  counseling  is  such  an  effective 
smoking cessation technique, we wanted to take advantage 
of 
flexibility  provided  by  mobile 
technologies  to  deliver  regular  personal  counseling  to  the 
smoker.  To  support  these  factors  further,  QuittyLink  logs 
data about the user’s smoking habits, which is then sent to a 
quitline expert. The expert then delivers weekly counseling 
tailored to each individual. This can then be read at a place 
and  time  of  the  user’s  choosing,  even  reviewed  later, 
potentially reaching smokers who would otherwise not seek 
personal counseling.  

QuittyLink Interaction Design 
The interaction design of QuittyLink was kept as simple as 
possible  to  encourage  people  to  use  it  frequently  during 
their day. The system was designed in Denmark to be used 

with the general population. To make it accessible to a wide 
variety  of  people  with  different  backgrounds,  educations 
and  ages,  the  system  was  created  using  the  Danish 
language.  For  the  purpose  of  this  paper, we  have  provided 
English  versions  of  the  screens,  pertinent  to  understanding 
the design concept. QuittyLink has three tabs corresponding 
to the main interactive parts of the app: Track, My Data and 
Tips  (Figure  2).  Since  smoking  cessation  counseling  in 
Denmark  is  free  as  part  of  the  free  health  care  system,  we 
also made the QuittyLink app available for free. 

The  Track  screen  (Figure  2a)  has  very  few  elements  and 
very simple interaction. It is used to register the number of 
cigarettes  “SMOKED”  or  “RESISTED”  each  time.  If  they 
have  smoked,  they  need  to  press  the  red  button  the  exact 
number of times corresponding to the number of cigarettes 
smoked  in  that  session.  Whether  they  have  smoked  or 
resisted users can then choose from a predefined list of 10 
different  situations  that  triggered  them  to  want  to  smoke 
(e.g.,  relaxation,  work,  party,  coffee/tea,  driving,  morning 
routine).  They  can  tick  as  many  as  are  relevant  or  an 
“other”  option  if  their  particular  trigger  is  not  listed.  To 
complete the input the user presses “Save” at the top of the 
screen,  and  the  time,  date  and  location  of  the  smoking 
episode  are  recorded  automatically  by  the  system  coupled 
with the input information. All data is saved to a server. 

The  My  Data  facilitates  selection  between  three  different 
visualizations  of  the  user’s  smoking  history  in  an  easy  to 
read and understand format. Common to all is the intention 
of  provoking 
self-awareness  by  providing  accurate 
information  about  a  persons  smoking  habits  over  time. 
They are able to see whether they are reducing the number 
of  cigarettes  over  time,  how  often  they  resist  having  a 
cigarette,  and  the  kinds  of  locations  and  situations  that 
trigger their smoking.  

The  Process  line  graph  (Figure  2b)  shows  the  number  of 
cigarettes  smoked  over  time  against  the  number  resisted, 
allowing  people  to  compare  the  two  and  draw  their  own 
conclusions  about  what  that  might  mean.  Above  the  graph 

Figure 2. QuittyLink screens: a) Track, b) My Data-Process, c) My Data-Triggers, d) My Data-Places, e) Tips 

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark100 
 
   
    
    
    
    
 
the  total  numbers  of  smoked  and  resisted  cigarettes  since 
they  started  using  the  app  are  shown.  A  user  can  get 
information about the exact number of cigarettes smoked on 
a particular day by tapping on the point on the graph. 

The  Triggers  pie  chart  (Figure  2c),  “Triggers  you  can’t 
resist”  shows  the  proportions  of  different  situations  that 
have 
triggered  smoking  episodes,  (e.g.,  work,  party, 
coffee/tea,  social).  This  gives  smokers  insight  into  what 
situations  trigger  them  to  smoke  most  often.  Tapping  the 
bottom  label  “Triggers  you  resist  well”  activates  an 
alternate chart showing the same information about resisted 
cigarettes.  The  user  can  toggle  between  these  two  charts. 
They  can  also  tap  on  the  pie  slice  to  find  out  the  exact 
number of cigarettes it represents. 

The  Places  bar  chart  (Figure  2d)  shows  how  many 
cigarettes have been smoked at different locations, given as 
street  addresses  (e.g.,  Helenelyst  8220  Aarhus).  This  gives 
users  an  understanding  of  where  they  tend  to  smoke  the 
most, helping them to reflect on the kinds of locations (and 
hence  perhaps  situations)  they  need  to  avoid,  or  be  more 
aware of in resisting their cigarette cravings. Common to all 
of the My Data visualizations is the intention of provoking 
self-awareness  of  smoking  habits  from  self-tracked  data. 
This  can  lead  to  people  adjusting  their  behaviors  in 
response  to  this  knowledge  and  has  proven  useful  in  other 
fields of health behavior change [7]. 

The  Tips  screen  (Figure  2e)  gives  access  to  three  different 
content  types:  Daily  motivations  to  smoking  cessation 
(factual  statements  about  the  pros  and  cons  of  smoking), 
Daily  tips  for  smoking  cessation  (easily  implementable 
piece of advice) and Personal advice for you based on your 
habits  (tailored  personal  counseling).  Motivational  stories 
and  daily  tips  are  sourced  from  various  online  quit  help 
sources,  and  updated  daily  by  the  system.  A  daily 
motivation  might  be,  for  example.  “Cigarette  smoke 
contains over 4000 chemicals and 69 of these are known to 
cause cancer.” An example of a daily tip is “Some smokers 
say  that  the  taste  of  citrus  reduces  cigarette  cravings,  so 
start your day with a glass of orange juice.” A daily SMS 
reminder  was  sent  to  inform  users  of  new  content  and  to 
prompt them to use QuittyLink.  

Figure 3. Personal Counseling based on smoking habits 

Personal  counseling  from  STOPLINEN  smoking  cessation 
service, Denmark, was provided weekly and tailored to the 

participant’s own situation, with the opportunity to contact 
the counselor directly for follow up advice. It was delivered 
directly  to  the  participants  smart  phone,  based  on  tracked 
data  on  the  smoker’s  habits  from  the  past  week,  including 
number of cigarettes coupled with trigger situations, times, 
and locations (see Figure 3). Push notifications alerted users 
to the arrival of their personal counseling messages.  

FIELD STUDY  
We  conducted  a  field  study  of  QuittyLink  in  everyday  use 
over  a  period  of  three  weeks.  This  study  duration  allowed 
people to get used to the app as part of their every day life 
(as  opposed  to  a  snapshot  study  of  use)  and  allowed  us  to 
give  a  each  participant  counseling  feedback  a  number  of 
times. The aim of the study was not to investigate sustained 
behavioral  change,  which  would  have  required  a  much 
longer study duration, but explore how smokers responded 
to entering data about their smoking habits and then receive 
personal counseling advice based on this input, direct to the 
QuittyLink  app.  We  also  wanted  to  see  if  the  My  Data 
visualizations  prompted  self-reflection  on  their  smoking 
habits and the effect that this and/or the counseling had on 
their ability to reduce cigarette intake, in the short term. The 
field  study  was  conducted  in  Denmark  in  spring  of  2014. 
The  app  was  delivered  using  public  app  stores,  and  so  it 
was possible for people not directly recruited to the study to 
sign up for the app and join. Participants were asked to use 
the app every day as part of their normal smoking routines 
for the duration of the study.  

their  smoking  habits.  Of 

Participants completed a demographic survey that included 
information  about 
the  13 
participants  in  the  study  4  were  male  and  9  female. 
Participant age ranged from 22 to 52 years with a mean of 
35  and  a  standard  deviation  of  11.8.  Seven  of  the 
participants  had  an  iPhone  and  six  had  an  Android  device. 
Eleven  participants  had  previously  tried  to  quit  smoking. 
Six  were  thinking  about  quitting,  4  were  preparing  to  quit 
and 3 were trying to stay quit. Based on Fagerströms test of 
nicotine dependency [6], 3 participants had no dependency, 
2  had  very  low  dependence,  6  participants  had  low  to 
moderate dependence and 2 had high nicotine dependence.  
See Table 1 for details. 

During the study, each participant was asked to use the app 
every  day  whenever  he/she  smoked  a  cigarette  or  had  a 
craving. All participants received a new motivation and tip 
each day, with an SMS to remind them to use the app. Once 
a week, the tracked data for each participant was collected 
and  sent  to  the  counselor.  Based  on  their  initial  survey 
responses  and  the  tracked  data  from  the  past  week, 
participants  then  received  personal  counseling  messages, 
typically 15-25 lines, from the expert counselor. All content 
sent to the participants remained accessible at all times, so 
they had the possibility to revisit advice as needed. 

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark101 
 
 
Participant 

Age 

Gender  Nicotine dependency  App entries 

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

47 

43 

24 

22 

22 

45 

26 

51 

52 

25 

45 

30 

F 

F 

F 

F 

F 

F 

F 

F 

F 

M 

M 

M 

Low to moderate 

High 

High 

Low to moderate 

Very low 

Very low 

None 

Low to moderate 

Low to moderate 

None 

Low to moderate 

Low to moderate 

M 

26 
Table 1. Participant overview 

None 

146 

26 

8 

8 

31 

7 

76 

6 

198 

14 

112 

80 

30 

After  the  study,  we  conducted  semi-structured  interviews 
with  each  participant  to  discuss  their  experiences  with 
QuittyLink and the role it played in their smoking cessation. 
Questions covered general impressions of the app, entering 
data,  reading  graphs,  impact  of  their  personal  counseling 
messages  and  suggestions  for  improvements.  During  the 
interview,  we  used  information  about their  use  pattern  and 
their logged interactions with the app to ask individual and 
specific  questions.  We  were  interested  in  their  reflections 
on  their  smoking  habits  and  whether  they  felt  they  had 
changed  during  the  study.  We  asked  how  motivated  they 
were  to  quit  smoking  as  a  result  of  their  experience  with 
QuittyLink, and compared this to their response to the same 
question in the online survey at the beginning of the study. 
All interviews were audio recorded. 

Data  analysis  was  done  using  qualitative  content  analysis 
with partial transcription on audio recordings, as this was an 
explorative  design  study.  Researchers  listened  to  the  tapes 
individually,  noted  the  issues  discussed  at  each  section, 
compared notes, and then fully transcribed selected parts. 

FINDINGS 
Our participants used the app quite differently ranging from 
6  entries  for  one  person  to  198  entries  for  our  most  active 
participant  (where  each  entry  may  contain  more  than  one 
smoked cigarette). The mean number of entries was 57 and 
the  standard  deviation  was  61.8.  Although  we  discouraged 
it,  we  found  that  some  would  enter  the  day’s  cigarettes  all 
in one entry before going to bed at night. It seemed that for 
some this would be more convenient and recalling time and 
place for a smoke seemed less problematic for these people. 
In  the  following,  we  report  our  findings  as  three  overall 
themes on personal counseling using our mobile app. 

Learning about Time and Place for Smoking 
In  terms  of  the  feedback  provided  by  the  graphical 
visualizations,  7  out  of  13  users  said  that  they  learned 
something  new  about  their  smoking  habit.  One  said,  “I 

found out that I smoke the most at home and when passing 
time...I  always  thought  that  if  I  smoked,  it  was  because  I 
was  stressed.  So  my  justification  to  smoke  is  not  really 
honest.”  All  13  found  it  highly  motivating  to  get  a  simple 
and informative picture of their smoking patterns, however, 
all also mentioned a desire for the ability to choose the time 
frame of the graphs, in particular, to be able to compare this 
week’s  activity  with  last  week.  All  participants  reported 
being more motivated to stop smoking. We found that they 
expressed a general liking and interest in tracking smoking 
habits.  All  13  found  the  app  easy  to  use  and  10  out  of  13 
not too time consuming, “Yes, very, it was easy to use, even 
to me who is bad at using technology”, and, “Easy and fast. 
It  takes  a  quarter  of  a  second  to  open  and  then  you  just 
press save and ‘bang’, you are done”. Most participants, 11 
out  of  13,  found  the  daily  SMS  reminders  useful,  and  did 
not  mind  receiving  them,  although  smokers  who  were  not 
feeling motivated to quit tended to not like being reminded 
to  use  the  app  each  day.  The  SMSs  successfully  reminded 
participants to use the app every time they had a craving. 

Convenient and Pertinent Mobile Counseling 
Users preferred the convenience of receiving counseling on 
their  mobile  phone  rather  than  having  to  contact  someone. 
Thus,  it  seemed  that  mobile  counseling  holds  great 
potential.  We  further  found  that  regardless  of  the  age, 
participants  were  keen  on  using  their  smartphone  for 
smoking  cessation.  Quite  interestingly,  participants  who 
had  not  yet  committed  to  quitting  said  that  registering 
resisted  cigarettes  made  them  crave  a  cigarette  even  more. 
Thus,  the  app  sometimes  had  counter-productive  effects. 
Ironically, one participant rewarded himself with a cigarette 
for  resisting  one,  “Good  job,  you  have  done  well,  smoke  a 
cigarette for that.” But participants who were serious about 
quitting or trying to stay quit found the Resisted button and 
graph  very  useful  and  liked  that  they  could  see  their  own 
progress  over  time.  In  relation  to  registering  resisted 
cigarettes it should be noted that when resisting an urge to 
smoke,  the  urge  often  doesn’t  go  away.  Hence  people 
could, theoretically, keep clicking the “RESIST” button and 
thereby  registering  one  resisted  cigarette  as  many  resisted 
ones. However, we did not hear of any such use of the app 
to inflate the number of resisted cigarettes.  

We observed a direct correlation between users’ motivation 
to  quit  and  their  acceptance  of  counseling  messages. Eight 
of the participants, who took their quitting attempt seriously 
and  wanted  to  change  their  habits  found  them  personal, 
motivating  and  helpful,  saying,  “It  gave  me  more 
motivation.  That  I  am  going  to  make  it…the  counseling 
helped  me  find  out  by  myself  that  I  was  ready  to  stop”. 
Those  not  ready  to  quit,  the  other  5,  who  did  not  see  their 
smoking as a problem, said the counseling made them feel 
pressured.  All  participants  appreciated  that  the  counseling 
messages  were  personalized,  “It  means  a  lot  that  it  was 
written  specifically  to  me,  what  I  should  do,  and  not  what 
others should do”. 

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark102 
 
Effects of Mobile Smoking Counseling 
Nine of the participants reported a positive  change in their 
smoking habits after the three weeks of use. They had either 
reduced  their  consumption  or  QuittyLink  had  supported 
them  in  staying  quit,  “The  app  had  a  major  impact;  it  has 
helped  me  to  think  about  my  consumption.  It  helped  to 
postpone cigarettes.”  Many mentioned that knowing that a 
real  person  (the  counselor)  had  put  time  and  effort  into 
writing  the  personal  messages  was  a  great  encouragement 
and motivation to quit. The 4 who did not change behavior 
during the study reported that QuittyLink at least made them 
reflect  more  on  their  habits,  potentially  inspiring  future 
behavior change, “I have found out where my weakness lies. 
I think more about it every time I light a cigarette”. 

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
This study contributes findings in terms of the ease of self-
tracking  smoking  behaviors,  the  perceived  usefulness  of 
visualizations  of  smoking  habits,  SMS  reminders,  and  the 
convenience  and  efficacy  of  personalized  counseling 
delivered  directly  to  a  person’s  smart  phone.  We  confirm 
the  positive  effects  of  these  features  on  changing  people’s 
health  behaviors,  with  respect  to  our  particular  QuittyLink 
design, as detailed above, and the field study showing that 
these  designed  features  were  particularly  effective  with 
smokers who had already committed to trying to quit. 

Through  a  field  deployment,  tracked  data,  and  follow-up 
interviews, we gathered and documented insights about the 
potentials and challenges of designing an effective smoking 
cessation  app,  thus  contributing  to  the  body  of  knowledge 
on  technology-assisted  smoking  cessation.  Most  important 
in  our  results  was  the  finding  that  providing  personalized 
counseling  on  smart  phones,  based  on  data  about  the 
individual  user’s  actual  smoking  habits,  collected  via  the 
phone,  was  very  positively  received  by  users.  This  offers 
promising potential for quit organizations to provide one of 
the most effective quit mechanisms (personal counseling) to 
a  much  wider  audience  than  clinics  are  currently  able  to 
reach. As covered by [2, 19] the problem has not been lack 
of  counselor’s  time,  but  unwillingness  by  smokers  to  seek 
institutional  help,  for  reasons  such  as  inconvenience  or 
reluctance to put themselves “out there”, etc. 

While  computer-tailored  content  for  smokers  is  not  a  new 
idea,  using  actual  counselors  to  write  personal  advice 
specifically  for  that  individual,  based  on  their  actual 
smoking patterns and delivering it to them on smartphones 
is new - and it proved to be a motivator to both participate 
in  recording  their  activities,  and  reducing  their  cigarette 
intake.  Involving  users  in  tracking  of  data  about  their 
smoking  habits  helped  make  them  aware  of  when,  where 
and why they smoked thus supporting them in taking action 
to  change  that  behavior  if  they  wanted  to.  To  our 
knowledge,  this  combination  of  real-time  self-tracked  and 
system-tracked  data  providing  a  very  detailed  picture  of 
peoples’  smoking  habits  is  a  new  approach  to  smoking 
cessation  technology  design.  Especially  when  this  data  is 

then  used  to  both  provide  visualizations  for  personal 
reflection and expert counseling advice. 

the 

that 

We  discovered  that  QuittyLink  promoted  self-awareness 
and  self-motivation  and  provided  effective  guidance  and 
support  for  people  wanting  to  quit  smoking.  We  further 
tracking  offered  by  QuittyLink  was 
found 
considerably more accurate than smoker’s own perceptions 
of  their  smoking  habits,  and  that  this  allows  people  to 
develop more effective personal quitting strategies. Finally, 
we  found  it  interesting  that  self-tracking  of  “resisted” 
cigarettes  can  be  counterproductive,  leading  smokers  in  an 
early  quitting  stage  to  actually  smoke  as  a  reward  for 
resisting. We will use this and other findings from our study 
to redesign future iterations of QuittyLink that take account 
of smokers’ individual differences. 

Although  we  achieved  positive  results  in  our  study,  much 
more  work  is  needed  to  explore  long-term  strategies  for 
to 
interactive  mobile 
effectively  using 
facilitate  smoking  cessation,  but  we  can  see  that  this 
research represents a very promising start. 

technologies 

REFERENCES 
1.  Abroms, L. C., Lee Westmaas, J., Bontemps-Jones, J., 
Ramani, R. and Mellerson, J. A content analysis of 
popular smartphone apps for smoking cessation. Am. J. 
Prev. Med., 45, 6 (2013), 732-736. 

2.  Chapman, S. Stop Smoking Clinics: A case for their 

abandonment. The Lancet, 325, 8434 (1985), 918-920. 

3.  Chiu, M., Chang, S., Chang, Y., Chu, H., Chen, C. C., 
Hsiao, F. and Ko, J. Playful bottle. Proc. Ubicomp ‘09, 
ACM Press (2009), 185-194. 

4.  Consolvo, S., Everitt, K., Smith, I. and Landay, J. 

Design Requirements for Technologies that Encourage 
Physical Activity. Proc. CHI ‘06, ACM Press (2006), 
457-466. 

5.  Consolvo, S., Libby, R., Smith, I., Landay, J., 

McDonald, D., Toscos, T., Chen, M., Froehlich, J., 
Harrison, B., Klasnja, P., Lamarca, A. and Legrand, L. 
Activity sensing in the wild: A Field Trial of UbiFit 
Garden. Proc. CHI ‘08, ACM Press (2008), 1797-1806. 

6.  Fagerström Test for nicotine dependence. 

http://www.health.wa.gov.au/smokefree/docs/Fgerstrom
_Test.pdf 

7.  Fogg, B.J. Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to 
Change What We Think and Do. Elsevier Science, 2002. 

8.  Free, C., Free, R., Whittaker, R., Knight, T., Abramsky, 
A. and Rodgers, I. G. Txt2stop: a pilot randomised 
controlled trial of mobile phone-based smoking 
cessation support. Tobacco control, 18, 2 (2009), 88-91. 

9.  Graham, C., Benda, P., Howard, S., Balmford, J., 

Bishop, N. and Borland, R. “heh – keeps me off the 
smokes...”: Probing Technology Support for Personal 
Change. Proc. OzCHI ’06, ACM Press(2006), 221- 228. 

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark103 
 
10. Lin, J., Mamykina, L., Lindtner, S., Delajoux, G. and 
Strub, H. Fish'n'steps: Encouraging physical activity 
with an interactive computer game. Proc. UbiComp 
2006, Springer (2006), 261-278. 

11. Paay, J., Kjeldskov, J., Brinthaparan, U., Lichon, L., 

Rasmussen, S., Srikandaraja, N., Smith, W., Wadley, G., 
Ploderer, B. Quitty: Using Technology to Persuade 
Smokers to Quit. Proc. NordiCHI ‘14, ACM Press 
(2014), 551-560. 

12. Paay, J., Kjeldskov, J., Skov, M., Lichon, L. and 

Rasmussen, S. Understanding Individual Differences for 
Tailored Smoking Cessation Apps. Proc. CHI ‘15, 
ACM Press (2015). 

13. Ploderer, B., Smith, W., Pearce, J. and Borland, R. A 
Mobile App Offering Distractions and Tips to Cope 
With Cigarette Craving: A Qualitative Study. JMIR 
mHealth uHealth 2, 2 (2014), e23. 

14. Prochaska, J. and Velicer, W. The Transtheoretical 
Model of Health Behavior Change. Am. J. of Health 
Promotion, 12, 1 (1997), 38-48. 

letters for smoking cessation: theoretical and empirical 
variability of tailoring. Int. J. Med. Inform., 77, 11 
(2008), 715-722. 

17. Shiffman, S., Paty, J., Rohay, J., Di Marino, M. and 

Gitchell, J. The efficacy of computer-tailored smoking 
cessation material as a supplement to nicotine patch 
therapy. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 64 (2001), 35-
46. 

18. Stead, L. F., Hartmann-Boyce, J., Perera, R. and 
Lancaster, T. Telephone counselling for smoking 
cessation. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. 8 (2013), 
CD002850. 

19. Strecher, V. Computer-tailored smoking cessation 

materials: A review and discussion. Patient Education 
and Counseling, 36 (1999), 107-117. 

20. Strecher, V., Kreuter, M., Den Boer, D., Kobrin, S., 
Hospers, H. and Skinner, C. The effects of computer-
tailored smoking cessation messages in family practice 
settings. J. Fam. Pract. 39, 3 (1994), 262-270. 

21. West, R. with Smyth, C., West, J. The SmokeFree 

15. Quit Victoria. Health risks of smoking, 

Formula. Orion, 2013. 

http://www.quit.org.au/reasons-to-quit/health-risks-of-
smoking. Updated 2014. 

16. Schumann, A., John, U., Ulbricht, S., Ruge, J., Bischof, 
G. and Meyer, C. Computer-generated tailored feedback 

22. World Health Organization. Tobacco. Fact Sheet 339, 
http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs339/en. 
Updated May 2014 

Health & SupportMobileHCI'15, August 24–27, Copenhagen, Denmark104 
 
 
