Real-Life Experiences with an Adaptive Light Bracelet

Jutta Fortmann
University of Oldenburg
Oldenburg, Germany
jutta.fortmann@uni-
oldenburg.de

Benjamin Poppinga
Smarttention Systems
Oldenburg, Germany
bp@benjaminpoppinga.de

Wilko Heuten
OFFIS - Institute for
Information Technology
Oldenburg, Germany
heuten@ofﬁs.de

Susanne Boll
University of Oldenburg
Oldenburg, Germany
susanne.boll@uni-
oldenburg.de

ABSTRACT
In the last years, wearable devices have been an emerg-
ing trend on the market. Today, several wearable devices
present information through light spots, especially those used
for self-tracking. In this work we present a ﬁeld evaluation
of an adaptive light bracelet that serves as a reminder of
ﬂuid intake. We investigated how users and observers expe-
rience the bracelet under real-world conditions in compar-
ison to a non-adaptive bracelet. Context awareness is im-
plemented in that the LED’s brightness changes according
to an ongoing event.
In a 16-participant 2-weeks experi-
ment we found participants and observers experienced the
adaptive bracelet more positively. Further, we found ob-
servers experienced the adaptive bracelet signiﬁcantly more
attractively and could identify signiﬁcantly better with it.
Our results will inspire designers and developers of wearable
light displays.

CCS Concepts
•Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in
ubiquitous and mobile computing;

Keywords
Wearable Computing, Digital Jewellery, Fluid Intake Re-
minder, Light, Context Awareness, Observer Experience

1.

INTRODUCTION

In recent years wearable devices have been an emerg-
ing trend on the market. Devices that promote a healthy
lifestyle have become especially popular. To use all a de-
vice’s capabilities, a person needs to wear it all the time,
thus, aesthetics, as well as physical and social comfort, are
important aspects of the device. Typically, wearables are

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
British HCI 2015, July 13 - 17, 2015, Lincoln, United Kingdom
c(cid:13) 2015 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-3643-7/15/07. . . $15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2783446.2783572

shaped in a convenient way, such as clips or wristbands.
To visualise information, many devices use small displays,
e.g., to show the number of steps taken, such as the Fit-
bit One1. Other devices, such as the Nike+ FuelBand2, use
light emitting diodes (LEDs), e.g., to indicate the progress
towards a set goal. While the information is important for
the users themselves, it can cause discomfort and can con-
fuse bystanders when displayed in a conspicuous way. Con-
sequently, the unobtrusiveness of a persuasive device has
been identiﬁed as an important design goal [3].

At the same time, it is unclear how this design goal can be
achieved. Context awareness has generally been proposed as
a possible solution [10, 15]. However, this has not yet been
studied for wearable light displays in real contexts, which
makes its impact questionable. In this paper, we present a
ﬁeld study, in which we evaluated an adaptive light bracelet
that serves as a ﬂuid intake reminder. The bracelet consists
of one permanently illuminated Reminder LED, eight Vol-
ume LEDs, and a button. We enable users to change the
bracelet’s appearance, i.e., the brightness of the Reminder
LED, according to an ongoing calendar event. The ongoing
calendar event deﬁnes the context to which the brightness of
the LED adapts. We studied how the adaptive display will
change the bracelet’s usability, and how users and observers
perceive the adaptive bracelet with regard to emotions, at-
tractiveness, and identity in comparison to a non-adaptive
version of the bracelet.

We found that participants experienced the adaptive brace-
let as being signiﬁcantly more stylish, presentable, and pleas-
ant. Observers felt signiﬁcantly happier when looking at
an adaptive bracelet than when looking at a non-adaptive
bracelet. Also, observers could identify signiﬁcantly better
with the adaptive bracelet and found it signiﬁcantly more
attractive than a non-adaptive bracelet.

The contributions of this paper are as follows:

• We present a wearable adaptive ﬂuid intake reminder
display, a light bracelet that implements context aware-
ness by connecting the LED’s brightness level to cal-
endar events.

• We show that participants and observers experienced

the adaptive bracelet more positively than a non-adaptive

1https://www.fitbit.com/uk/one
2http://www.nike.com/us/en_us/lp/nikeplus-fuelband

138bracelet, by conducting and analysing a 2-weeks ﬁeld
study

The paper is structured as follows. After we give insights
into related papers and key research ﬁndings, we describe
the adaptive light bracelet. We then present a ﬁeld study,
in which we investigated the eﬀect of context awareness on
emotions, attractiveness of the display, and identiﬁcation
with the bracelet. After discussing our ﬁndings, we conclude
the paper with a summary of insights, the key contributions
and ideas for future work.

2. RELATED WORK

In the following we present related work which focuses on
wrist-worn light displays, and wearable context-aware sys-
tems.

2.1 Wrist-Worn Light Displays

In previous work diﬀerent applications have been proposed
for wrist-worn light displays. Hansson et al.
[7] proposed
the Reminder Bracelet, a simple black bracelet with three
red LEDs, which indicated notiﬁcations triggered by a con-
nected PDA. Its purpose was to notify the user of sched-
uled events in a subtle and silent way using light, colour
and blinking patterns. Damage was another, more fash-
ioned LED bracelet consisting of one white and ﬁve coloured
LEDs. The author’s vision was to connect it to a messen-
ger application on a smartphone for that it supports the
communication in a social group [16]. Ahde and Mikkonen
[1] describe their vision of communicating spatial proximity
of friends by using LED-illuminated bracelets. With Activ-
MON, Burns et al. [2] presented a watch-like device with an
LED that shows the user’s and the user’s friends’ physical
activity level. Today’s wearable consumer products such as
the Fitbit Flex3, the Nike+ FuelBand, or the Misﬁt Shine4
use single light spots to present information in a simple and
quickly accessible way.

2.2 Context-Aware Systems

Context awareness is an important feature of a wearable

user interface [10, 5, 15]. Dey [4] deﬁnes context as

“[...] any information that can be used to char-
acterise the situation of an entity [...], that is
considered relevant to the interaction between a
user and an application.”.

Furthermore, he deﬁnes that

“a system is context-aware if it uses context to
provide relevant information and/or services to
the user, where relevancy depends on the user’s
task.”.

Dey lists three categories of features that a context-aware
application can support, which are:

• presentation of information and services to a user,

• automatic execution of a service for a user, and

• tagging of context to information to support later re-

trieval.

3https://www.fitbit.com/uk/flex
4http://www.misfitwearables.com/

In his list of four ideal attributes of a wearable device,
Starner [15] deﬁnes that a wearable device must observe the
user’s environment to provide the best cognitive support for
the user. A wearable device should adapt its interaction
modalities based on the user’s context, and it should aug-
ment and mediate interactions with the user’s environment.
In previous work, several context-aware wearable displays
have been presented. Rhodes [12] introduced the Wearable
Remembrance Agent, a system with a heads-up display that
provides notes to the user that might be of relevance at a cer-
tain moment. The captured context information is e.g. the
time-stamp, the user’s physical location, and which persons
are around. Kern and Schiele [10] investigated whether or
not to notify the user in a speciﬁc context and if so, through
which modality. They classiﬁed the context according to
ﬁve factors: the importance of the event that is being no-
tiﬁed (a), the user’s activity (b), the social activity (c), the
social situation (d), and the location (e). They present a
model to classify typical situations with regard to the inter-
ruptability of the user and that of the environment. Also,
they map these interruptability classes to appropriate noti-
ﬁcation modalities, which are vibration, beep, ring, speech
message, a watch display, and a head mounted display.

Our system uses light to present information. Light as
a modality to present information can be modiﬁed in vari-
ous parameters. From the perception oriented colour model
HSV (Hue, Saturation, Value) we can derive the basic pa-
rameters of light: colour, saturation and brightness [14].
These parameters can be extended with regard to time and
space. Time can be expressed in the duration for which a
light is presented. Furthermore, when manipulating the pa-
rameters it is possible to create various rhythms with varying
colours, saturations and brightness. Space can be expressed
in the spatial location of a presented light. Previous work on
wearable light displays found that the light’s brightness has
a big inﬂuence on the perceived obtrusiveness of the display
[2, 11]. In this work, we use the light’s brightness to regulate
the obtrusiveness of the display dependent on the event the
user is currently taking part in.

Previous work investigated which kind of information should

be presented [12], in which level of detail information should
be presented [13], and through which modality an informa-
tion should be presented in a speciﬁc context [10]. As a light
display has a much higher visibility than a graphical display,
its presentation design is important. This especially applies
to wearable displays worn in a mobile context in which other
people are close by. However, it has not been studied yet
how information should be presented on a wearable light
display in a way that ﬁts well into everyday life. From pre-
vious work, we know that the context in which a wearable
display is worn changes the degree of comfort a wearer feels
[6]. Thus, we need to investigate if and how such displays
should adapt to the context to make the wearer feel more
comfortable.

3. THE ADAPTIVE LIGHT BRACELET

For the study, we expanded WaterJewel, a ﬂuid intake re-
minder bracelet [6], by context awareness capabilities. Wa-
terJewel is implemented on the Arduino platform and uses
light spots to present information on a user’s ﬂuid intake
behaviour. The conceptual design is based on a recommen-
dation of the European Food Safety Authority to drink at
least 2 litres of ﬂuid a day in 8 evenly distributed servings.

139A continuously illuminated light spot reminds the user to
drink regularly in that it indicates the time elapsed since
the last intake (“Reminder LED”). This is presented by a
gradient from red (user drank two or more hours ago) to
green (user just drank). Another eight LEDs are arranged
in a row and show the amount of ﬂuid intake for the day, i.e.
how many glasses have been drunk (“Volume Display”). The
ﬁrst seven LEDs are coloured blue. The last one is green to
highlight that the daily goal of 8 servings of ﬂuid has been
accomplished. A drink entry is made though a long push of
a button on the bracelet. The Volume Display is activated
through a short button push.

For the study, the WaterJewel bracelet was accompanied
by an Android application that connects to the bracelet via
Bluetooth. After an initial pairing the application automat-
ically connects to the bracelet whenever it is in reach. This
application is able to control the brightness of the Reminder
LED at three diﬀerent levels, which can be mapped directly
to certain obtrusiveness levels as follows:

Level #1 switched oﬀ – unobtrusive

Level #2 low brightness – less obtrusive

Level #3 full brightness (default) – obtrusive

Instead of using a custom user interface, we linked the ap-
plication to the device’s calendar. This allows users to spec-
ify the brightness (obtrusiveness) of the Reminder LED in
the title of a calendar entry, e.g., Tea-Time with Granny #2,
thereby making the bracelet adaptive to individual calendar
entries. Here, a calendar event deﬁnes the context. When
a new calendar event starts, the brightness of the Reminder
LED is updated immediately according to the digit placed
after the hash mark in the event’s title. When there is no
calendar event deﬁned in the user’s calendar application,
the LED’s brightness will be set to the default value, i.e.,
the brightest level.

4. FIELD EVALUATION METHOD

An earlier study of WaterJewel and related work found
that a light’s brightness has a major inﬂuence on the per-
ceived obtrusiveness of a display [6, 5, 11]. However, how
exactly a display should adapt brightness in practice, and
how in detail an adaptation changes the human’s percep-
tion of the display, remains unclear. In this study, we adopt
the idea to modulate the display’s brightness and study how
an adaptive Reminder LED changes the overall perception of
the bracelet. In detail, we investigated how users as well as
observers experienced the bracelet in everyday situations in
terms of perceived emotions, identiﬁcation with the bracelet,
and perceived attractiveness of the bracelet. In detail, we
investigate the following hypotheses:

H1 An adaptive display positively aﬀects the perceived emo-

tions when confronted with the bracelet.

H2 An adaptive display positively inﬂuences how people

identify with the bracelet.

H3 An adaptive display positively changes the perceived

attractiveness of the bracelet.

Because our goal was to study the adaptation on a wear-
able device, we studied the hypotheses from two perspec-
tives. On the one hand, we studied each hypothesis for the
the wearers of the device,
participants of our study, i.e.

which we refer to as H1P, H2P, and H3P. On the other
hand, we investigated the hypotheses for the external ob-
servers of the system, which we refer to as hypotheses H1O,
H2O, and H3O.

4.1 Participant Questionnaire

To measure the emotions (H1P), the identity (H2P), and
the attractiveness (H3P), we decided for subjective feed-
back through a custom questionnaire. This questionnaire is
supposed to be answered in-situ and while or just after ac-
tually using the bracelet. Therefore, it ﬁrst asks for details
about the situation, i.e., date, time, place, lighting condi-
tions, and the type of persons who accompany the partici-
pant, e.g., the public, family members, or nobody. Further,
the participant was asked if he or she perceived the bright-
ness of the Reminder LED during the situation as suitable
on a 7-point Likert scale, ranging from disagree (1) to agree
(7). As measures for emotions, identity, and attractiveness,
we integrated parts of two established standard question-
naires, i.e., Diﬀerential Emotions Scale (DES) [9] and At-
trakDiﬀ [8], into the questionnaire. The part that was in-
spired by the DES consists of a set of 8 statements about
emotions, e.g., “I felt surprised”, and could be rated on a
7-point Likert scale, ranging from disagree (1) to agree (7).
We chose the DES because we were especially interested in
the emotions perceived towards the bracelet, and the DES
is a validated instrument to assess these. The AttrakDiﬀ
alone would not have covered emotions extensively. Further,
the questionnaire comes with 13 contrary word pairs, e.g.,
isolating/connecting, which were taken from the AttrakDiﬀ
questionnaire and measure the hedonic quality and attrac-
tiveness of a used device. In detail, 6 of these pairs measure
the identity (HQ-I), and 7 of these pairs measure the at-
tractiveness (ATT). The attributes from the AttrakDiﬀ are
rated on a 7-point scale ranging from the ﬁrst word (1) to
the second word (7). A full list statements and word pairs
can be found in Table 1.

4.2 Observer Questionnaire

With the participant questionnaire we measure how an
adaptive bracelet changes the emotions of a participant, i.e.
the wearer of the bracelet, how he or she identiﬁes with
the bracelet, and how it attracts him or her. However, to
get a holistic understanding, we also studied how these three
aspects change for observers. The aspects need to be studied
to provide answers to hypotheses H1O, H2O, and H3O. An
observer is a person that stays in the proximity of the wearer
by accident. The duration of an observation can vary.

Observers completed the same questionnaire as an online
version with further details, such as a study participant iden-
tiﬁer and a unique, alphanumeric nickname, which the ob-
server could freely decide on. These values allowed mapping
all questionnaire responses. Observers could be made aware
of the online questionnaire through a study participant, who
was wearing the bracelet. The awareness could be created
using a link card, which is a paper card that comes with
instructions, a written link as well as a QR code to the on-
line questionnaire, and the unique, numeric identiﬁer of the
study participant who handed the card (see Figure 1, top).

4.3 Design

We designed the study as a within-subjects, repeated mea-
sures experiment with two conditions. One condition is the

140Figure 1: Observers were provided with link cards
that come with a link to an online questionnaire
(top). These allow to capture the observer’s experi-
ences and impressions regarding the bracelet. Link
cards were originally provided in German.

earlier described light bracelet with adaptiveness, i.e., the
brightness of the Reminder LED can be controlled. The
other condition is the light bracelet without any adaptation
features, i.e., the default brightness is used. We counter-
balanced the conditions. Thus, half of the participants started
with an adaptive, the other half with a non-adaptive bracelet.

4.4 Participants

We acquired 18 participants, of which 2 stopped their par-
ticipation after a few days for personal reasons. The remain-
ing 16 participants had an average age of 26.1 years (SD 3.79
years), ranging from 20 to 37 years. 8 of the participants
were male, and 8 were female. They were recruited from the
local university, and through public announcements. None
of the participants was related to the research team. Partic-
ipants had an average daily ﬂuid intake of about 1.5 liters
(SD 0.50 liter), ranging from less than 1 liter to 3 liters. 12
participants reported that they want to increase their ﬂuid
intake, 3 were undecided, and 1 participant reported no in-
terest in increasing ﬂuid intake.

4.5 Procedure

At the beginning of the study, participants signed an in-
formed consent and completed a demographic questionnaire.
We introduced and set up the light bracelet with the corre-
sponding application on the participantsˆa ˘A¨Y smartphones,
and they got some time to become familiar with the sys-
tem. Also, we explained how participants could specify the
brightness of the Reminder LED when entering a new cal-
endar event in their favourite calendar application.

Participants were handed 40 of the earlier described paper
questionnaires and 40 of the link cards. We asked the partic-
ipants to complete approximately three of the questionnaires
per day and after varying situations, e.g., after a business
meeting or after taking the metro. Further, we asked partic-
ipants to hand out approximately three of the link cards per
day. These should be handed to observers, i.e. colleagues,

Figure 2: Male participant wearing the light bracelet
during the study. On his upper arm he wears an ad-
ditional armlet that contains the controlling hard-
ware, which is whipped with black felt for aesthetic
reasons.

friends, or any other persons who experienced any kind of
situation together with the study participant wearing the
light bracelet.

Each participant used the light bracelet for a total of two
weeks during his or her daily routine. Figure 2 shows a male
participant wearing the light bracelet during the study. Half
of the participants started with an adaptive bracelet, i.e. the
brightness of the Reminder LED could be controlled. The
other half started with a bracelet that had no adaptation
features, i.e. the default brightness was used. After the ﬁrst
week, the condition changed for all participants. During
the study, we conducted two interviews with each partic-
ipant, one after each week. We asked for overall impres-
sions and went through the completed questionnaires par-
ticipants brought with them, so that they could elaborate
on striking situations. Furthermore, participants completed
the well-established System Usability Scale (SUS) after each
week. After the second interview we collected all handed
materials, supported participants in deleting the app that
controlled the light bracelet, clariﬁed on remaining ques-
tions, and thanked the participants. Each participant was
rewarded with 25 EUR.

5. QUANTITATIVE RESULTS

In the following, we report our key quantitative ﬁndings,
whereby a full representation of the results can be found in
Table 1. For both, i.e., participants who wore the bracelet
and observers, we will report on changes in emotions, iden-
tity, and attractiveness. We used one-sided Wilcoxon signed
rank tests for all statistical investigations, because we ex-
pected only positive eﬀects of the context awareness.

5.1 Participant

Of the 640 handed questionnaires (40 questionnaires for
each of the 16 users), 416 (65.00 %) were completed and
returned. Of these, 218 were completed when using the
bracelet in the control condition and 198 when using it in
the experimental condition, in which it provided context
awareness. 97 questionnaires were answered for situations
in which participants were alone, 62 when they were in pub-

141Participant

Statement
I felt happy.
I felt surprised.
I was annoyed.
I was ashamed.
I felt guilty.
I was feared.
I was interested.
I was sad.
isolating/connective
tacky/stylish
cheap/premium
alienating/integrating
separates me/brings me closer
unpresentable/presentable
average
unpleasant/pleasant
ugly/attractive
disagreeable/likeable
rejecting/inviting
bad/good
repelling/appealing
discouraging/motivating
average

Contr.
3.43
2.24
2.13
1.42
1.26
1.12
3.11
1.12
4.03
3.17
3.35
3.99
4.01
3.48
3.67
3.38
2.95
3.73
3.97
4.11
3.77
4.56
3.78

Exp.
3.45
2.24
2.13
1.40
1.21
1.08
2.82
1.07
4.13
3.42
3.43
4.06
4.11
3.71
3.81
3.58
3.21
3.90
4.01
4.23
3.86
4.45
3.89

e
l
a
c
S

n
o
i
t
o
m
E

l
a
i
t
n
e
r
e
ﬀ
D

i

,

i

ﬀ
D
k
a
r
t
t
A

I
-

Q
H

,

i

ﬀ
D
k
a
r
t
t
A

T
T
A

Sign.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
0.05
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
0.05
n.s.
0.05
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.

Contr.
3.62
4.15
1.54
1.15
1.00
1.00
5.39
1.08
3.92
2.85
3.23
3.92
3.92
3.00
3.47
3.31
2.85
4.08
3.92
4.46
3.85
4.31
3.82

Observer
Exp.
4.69
5.31
1.56
1.31
1.44
1.19
6.00
1.31
5.00
4.00
4.25
4.94
5.19
3.75
4.52
4.44
3.63
5.13
4.75
5.38
4.75
5.38
4.77

Sign.
0.01
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
0.01
0.05
0.05
0.01
0.01
n.s.
0.01
0.05
n.s.
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.01

Table 1: An overview of all quantitative observations for participants and observers. Ratings on the Diﬀer-
ential Emotion Scale were given on a 7-point Likert scale, ranging from disagree (1) to agree (7). Responses
to AttrakDiﬀ pairs ranged from the ﬁrst word (1) to the second word (7).

lic among strangers, 59 when they were with friends, 57
when they were with family, 9 when they were with col-
leagues, 4 when supervisors were present, and in 4 cases the
participants did not provide us with details about the sit-
uation. The remaining 124 questionnaires were answered
in combinations of the above-mentioned situations, mostly
when participants were moving in public, accompanied by
family or partners. According to the free text answers about
the place, most participants stated they used the bracelet at
home or at work.

In the questionnaires, participants were asked to assess
the appropriateness of the Reminder LED’s brightness. In
the control condition, i.e., without context awareness, par-
ticipants rated the appropriateness with 4.82 (SD 1.35). In
contrast, participants rated the appropriateness with 5.90
(SD 1.08) in the experimental condition, i.e., about a full
step better. This diﬀerence is signiﬁcant (p < 0.01).

We asked participants to assess their emotions in the ex-
perienced situations, using a set of statements which were
inspired by the Diﬀerential Emotion Scale (DES). Overall,
they mostly stated similar emotion ratings for both condi-
tions. The most notable diﬀerence between the conditions
was observed for the rated interestedness, where the control-
condition was rated with 3.11 (SD 1.48) and the experimen-
tal condition with 2.82 (SD 1.64). However, this and none
of the other emotion statements showed any statistical sig-
niﬁcance.

The questionnaires further assessed how the participants
identiﬁed with the bracelet, which was measured with the
HQ-I part of the AttrakDiﬀ questionnaire. On average, the
HQ-I was 3.67 (SD 0.86) in the control condition and 3.81
(SD 0.95) in the experimental condition (see Figure 3). This

diﬀerence is of no statistical signiﬁcance. However, we ob-
served that participants assessed the display as being more
stylish in the experimental condition (M 3.42, SD 1.03) than
in the control condition (M 3.17, SD 0.99). Further, partici-
pants assessed that the experimental bracelet was more pre-
sentable (M 3.71, SD 1.36) than the non-adaptive bracelet
(M 3.48, SD 1.26). Both of these observations are of statis-
tical signiﬁcance (p < 0.05).

As a third parameter, the questionnaire assessed the per-
ceived attractiveness of the system, which was measured
with the ATT part of the AttrakDiﬀ questionnaire. Over-
all, participants tend to agree that the bracelet is similarly
attractive in both conditions, i.e., experimental 3.89 (SD
1.06), control 3.78 (SD 1.05).
In detail, we found that
participants rated the experimental system as signiﬁcantly
(p < 0.05) more pleasant to use (M 3.58, SD 1.60) than the
non-adaptive system (M 3.38, SD 1.64, see Figure 3).

After each week, participants were asked to complete a
System Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire. We observed
that in the control condition the light bracelet was rated
with 80.63 (SD 13.65), whereby it was rated with 79.22 (SD
17.74) in the experimental condition. This diﬀerence is not
signiﬁcant.

5.2 Observer

Altogether, the study participants issued 152 link cards
to observers, 82 during the experimental condition and 70
while using the bracelet in the control condition. On aver-
age, each participant issued 5.13 (SD 2.78) link cards in the
experimental and 4.34 (SD 3.48) in the control condition.
27 observers considered the link cards and completed a to-
tal of 29 online questionnaires, which results in a 19.08 %

1426. QUALITATIVE INSIGHTS

In the following we describe the qualitative insights that
we gained from the interviews with the participants. For
the analysis, interview notes were coded jointly by the in-
terviewer and the study director.

6.1 Overall Impressions

Overall, most participants liked the idea and the concept
of the bracelets. Several participants mentioned they re-
ceived positive feedback from friends, who said they would
also like to use the bracelet as a ﬂuid intake reminder. In
general, ten participants would like to use the bracelet in
future, with some saying it would have to be more sophis-
ticated (P11, P03), more compact (P02) and pretty (P06).
Four participants said they would not need it because they
found they already drink enough. Two participants would
prefer an app to a bracelet. Three participants stated they
found the app annoying in the way that they had to check
if the Bluetooth connection was available once in a while
and in that they had to interact with the phone to, e.g.,
enter dates. Five participants mentioned they would have
preferred to regulate the display’s brightness directly with a
button on the bracelet instead of with the app.

When we asked the participants for situations in which
they would not wear the bracelet, they named various situ-
ations for diﬀerent reasons. They stated situations in which
the bracelet could be damaged, such as during sport ac-
tivities, housework, in bed or when sweating due to hot
temperatures. They also named situations such as festive
occasions, burials, being onstage, at work and in a job in-
terview, because in these situations the bracelet would not
match the clothes and appearance. With regard to the con-
dition in which the bracelet was not adaptive, a participant
mentioned he felt uncomfortable wearing the bracelet at the
dentist because it lighted brightly. Regarding the same con-
dition, another participant reported that a lecturer wanted
him to remove the bracelet during a talk.

6.2 Perception of the Different Brightness Lev-

els

Most of the participants said they in general appreciated
the mapping of the diﬀerent obtrusiveness levels to the dif-
ferent brightness levels. But, the preferences for particular
brightness levels varied. In situations in which the bright-
ness level was set to the brightest level #3, some participants
complained about the light being too bright, in particular
in dimmed or dark environments. Participant P06 explicitly
said that he did not like that he could not switch oﬀ the
display during the non-adaptive condition. However, with
respect to brightness level #1, which meant the light was oﬀ,
two participants said they did use it very rarely or never at
all, because they disliked that the bracelet did not provide
any feedback. Participant P10 found that brightness level
#2 was the best choice in many cases. Another participant
said he would be ﬁne with brightness level #3 only. Two
participants wished for one or to more levels, e.g., between
brightness level #1 and #2 (P08).

6.3 Perceived Difference Between the Condi-

tions

Nine participants stated they did not consciously perceive
a diﬀerence in the bracelet’s display between the ﬁrst and the
second study week. Five participants said they consciously

Figure 3: For study participants we were unable to
observe any signiﬁcant diﬀerences regarding iden-
tity (HQ-I) and attractiveness (ATT). In contrast,
we found signiﬁcant eﬀects for the attractiveness
and identiﬁcation observers perceived towards the
bracelet. Error bars indicate the standard error.

return rate. Of these observers, 11 classiﬁed themselves as
friends of the study participant, 5 as strangers, 4 as family
members, 4 as colleagues, and 3 as professional superiors. 16
completed questionnaires concerned participants who were
using the light bracelet in the experimental condition, 13 re-
sponses were assessing participants who used it in the control
condition.

We found that observers felt signiﬁcantly happier when
facing an adaptive bracelet (M 4.69, SD 0.87) than facing
the regular bracelet (M 3.62, SD 1.50, p < 0.01). Otherwise
we did not observe any statistically signiﬁcant changes in
perceived emotions.

Regarding the identiﬁcation of observers with the system,
i.e., HQ-I, we observed that they overall tend to agree more
in the experimental condition (M 4.52, SD 0.84) than in the
control condition (M 3.47, SD 0.96, see Figure 3). This dif-
ference is statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.01). In detail, we
found that observers rated the experimental system to be
more connective (control 3.92, SD 0.95; experimental 5.00,
SD 0.73; p < 0.01), more stylish (control 2.85, SD 1.34; ex-
perimental 4.00, SD 1.51; p < 0.05), more premium (control
3.23, SD 1.64; experimental 4.25, SD 1.19; p < 0.05), more
integrating (control 3.92, SD 0.76; experimental 4.94, SD
0.77; p < 0.01), and less separating (control 3.92, SD 1.04;
experimental 5.19, SD 0.98; p < 0.01).

We further found that the attractiveness (ATT) of the
bracelet changes signiﬁcantly, depending on whether it is
adaptive or not. For the control condition observers agreed
to the attractiveness with 3.82 (SD 0.86) on average, whereby
they agreed with 4.77 (SD 1.10) in the experimental condi-
tion (see Figure 3). This diﬀerence is statistically signiﬁ-
cant (p < 0.01). In detail, the experimental condition was
rated to be more pleasant (control 3.31, SD 1.32; experi-
mental 4.44, SD 1.21, p < 0.05), likeable (control 4.08, SD
1.32; experimental 5.13, SD 1.45, p < 0.05), inviting (con-
trol 3.92, SD 0.95; experimental 4.75, SD 1.39, p < 0.05),
good (control 4.46, SD 1.20; experimental 5.38, SD 1.26,
p < 0.05), appealing (control 3.85, SD 0.90; experimental
4.75, SD 1.24, p < 0.05), and motivating (control 4.31, SD
0.75; experimental 5.38, SD 1.54, p < 0.05).

ParticipantObserver012345ATTHQ−IATTHQ−IParameterValueConditionControlExperimental143perceived a diﬀerence and appreciated that the brightness of
the display could be adapted in the experimental condition.
In the experimental condition two participants mentioned
that, after a while, they got used to the bracelet and did not
notice that they were wearing it.

6.4 Impact on Fluid Intake Behaviour

After the study, 10 participants stated they drank more
during the study than before. Two participants said they
drank much more consciously. Another two participants felt
conﬁrmed by the bracelet in that it showed them they drink
enough. During the study, situations occurred in which par-
ticipants did not feel the display to be necessary. For exam-
ple, a participant reported that during lunch he did not need
the display because he drank anyway. However, drinking be-
haviour was not tracked in the study because it was not in
the focus of this research. Eﬀects on ﬂuid intake behaviour
have been investigated in previous work [6].

7. DISCUSSION

The results show that participants, who wore the bracelet,
and observers diﬀered in their perception of the adaptive
bracelet. Overall, participants rated the adaptive and the
non-adaptive bracelet similarly. In the three ratings stylish,
presentable and pleasant they rated the adaptive bracelet
slightly higher. The ratings of observers were more marked.
They rated the adaptive bracelet more positively than the
non-adaptive bracelet in many aspects. Observers felt hap-
pier when facing an adaptive bracelet. In general, they could
identify signiﬁcantly better with the adaptive bracelet and
found it to be signiﬁcantly more attractive than the non-
adaptive bracelet.

7.1 Adaptation in General

Overall, participants liked the idea and concept of the
bracelets. In general, they appreciated the mapping of ob-
trusiveness levels to brightness levels, but their preferences
for particular brightness levels varied. Some participants re-
ported that in the beginning they could hardly estimate how
they should adjust the brightness levels, but after experienc-
ing the light in situ it was much easier.

Five participants wished for a manual regulation of the
bracelet’s brightness directly on the bracelet. This shows
that it is important that the device can be adapted to dif-
ferent contexts, but the adaptation does not necessarily need
to happen automatically. During the study, situations oc-
curred in which participants felt that the display of infor-
mation was not necessary, e.g., while having lunch. This
indicates that adaptation should not only be considered in
terms of the presentation design, but also in terms of the
information content that is presented. This implication ﬁts
in well with Starner’s fourth ideal attribute of a wearable
device: “Augment and mediate interactions with the user’s
environment” [15].

7.2 Emotional Responses

We recorded the emotional responses to the bracelet from
participants, i.e., wearers, and from observers, who were con-
fronted with the participants and the bracelet in various
situations. Our observations indicate that context aware-
ness and the related brightness adaptation do not change
the emotional responses signiﬁcantly. Therefore, we have

to reject H1P and H1O, and cannot argue that an adap-
tive light display improves perceived emotions for wearers
or observers.

In the interviews, ﬁve participants said they appreciated
that the brightness of the display could be adapted in the
experimental condition. This indicates a positive emotional
change towards the adaptive bracelet from the subjective
view of at least ﬁve participants. We suppose that the set
of statements we used according to the DES could be the
reason for why the emotion ratings diﬀered from the personal
statements of participants. Of the eight emotions asked for,
six were phrased negatively and only two positively, and the
emotions were very hard. When comparing user interfaces
that diﬀer only slightly in particular aspects, the emotions
asked for might not change signiﬁcantly. Also, assessing the
DES-oriented emotions in general might be diﬃcult when
evaluating a product because they focus on emotions we
typically do not connect to products, such as being “feared”
or “sad”. Other emotions are not covered at all, e.g., the
emotion described by “I appreciate that.”, which participants
stated in the interviews, cannot be mapped to one of the
emotions we asked for in the DES-oriented questionnaire.

7.3 Identiﬁcation With and Attractiveness of

the Bracelet

The issued questionnaire comes with a section to mea-
sure to what extent participants identify with the system.
Further, another section measures the perceived attractive-
ness of the system while being worn by participants. Both
sections were taken from the popular and established At-
trakDiﬀ questionnaire [8]. Our ﬁndings indicate that there
are no measurable signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the identiﬁcation
with and attractiveness of the system, therefore we have to
reject H2P and H3P.

Nevertheless, 5 of 16 study participants stated that they
clearly noticed the diﬀerence between the default brightness
and adapted brightness. Consensus was that the adaptation
is highly appreciated and valued, particularly for sensitive
situations, where the default brightness could be perceived
as disturbing or distracting. The quantitative results in-
dicate that participants found the adaptive bracelet signif-
icantly more stylish and more presentable. Therefore, we
suggest to further research the eﬀect of adaptation on the
perceived attractiveness and identity.

7.4 Observers’ Perception of the Bracelet

In the study we investigated the bracelet from two per-
spectives: participants, who were actual wearers, and ob-
servers. We did this because earlier work in related ﬁelds
showed that the perception of and reaction to wearable, in-
teractive devices might diﬀer signiﬁcantly between these two
groups.

We also asked observers to assess their identiﬁcation with
and the attractiveness of the bracelet with the same ques-
tionnaire that we handed over to study participants. Our
results indicate that observers can identify with the bracelet
signiﬁcantly better in the experimental condition, i.e., when
the bracelet is adaptive. Further, we found that an adaptive
bracelet was assessed to be signiﬁcantly more attractive to
the observers. Consequently, we have to accept hypotheses
H2O and H3O.

Overall, we can support the ﬁnding that wearers and ob-
servers of a device can get a diﬀerent impression from a

144wearable device. On average, we did not observe a signif-
icant diﬀerence in HQ-I, i.e., identity, or ATT, i.e., attrac-
tiveness, for participants. However, we did ﬁnd a signiﬁcant
diﬀerence for observers (p < 0.01). While the ratings be-
tween observers and participants are similar for the control
condition, the observers seem to perceive the adaptation in
a much more intense way, leading to a signiﬁcant change in
the perceived attractiveness and identity (see Figure 3).

We have the impression that observers are much more
sensitive to minor changes, like the adaptation of an LED’s
brightness. We further think that their feelings and insights
notably contribute to the overall acceptance and success of
wearable technology, and that this aspect has been under-
evaluated in the last few years. In fact, few details are known
how exactly the observers’ impressions drive their reactions,
and how these reactions inﬂuence and change the partici-
pants’ feelings. We therefore suggest that observers and the
observer’s perspective should become an essential aspect of
future design processes and research.

8. CONCLUSION

In the last years wearable devices that present information
through simple light displays have been an emerging trend
on the market. Characteristic for these displays is that they
are worn in varying contexts and clearly visible by wearers
and bystanders. Thus, while the presented information is
crucial for a user, it can cause discomfort and confuse by-
standers when displayed in a conspicuous way. However,
it has not been researched yet how the displays should be
designed in order to meet this design challenge.

In this paper, we presented a ﬁeld study of an adap-
tive light bracelet that serves as a ﬂuid intake reminder.
The study elaborated on the aspect, that users perceived
the lights’ brightness as too obtrusive in certain situations,
which was learned from previous studies. In the study, 16
participants wore the bracelet in their everyday life for a
total of two weeks each. In one week the bracelet adapted
the brightness of the light according to an ongoing event.
In the other week the bracelet did not provide adaptiveness
and always presented the light in the same brightness level.
Our results show that overall, participants liked the brace-
lets and the possibility to adapt the light’s brightness. We
found participants did not signiﬁcantly perceive the adaptive
bracelet diﬀerently with regard to emotions, attractiveness
and identiﬁcation, apart from single ratings, i.e., they ex-
perienced the adaptive bracelet as being signiﬁcantly more
stylish, presentable and pleasant. The ratings of observers
were more marked. They felt signiﬁcantly happier when
facing the adaptive bracelet, could in general identify signif-
icantly better with it and found it to be in general signiﬁ-
cantly more attractive than the non-adaptive bracelet.

From the study results we conclude, that, in general, inte-
grating context awareness into wrist-worn light displays is a
promising way to improve emotions towards the display, per-
ceived attractiveness of the display, and identiﬁcation with
it. The adaptation of the lights’ brightness level to user-
preset values has shown to be experienced as positive by
participants and in particular by observers. Our results will
inspire designers and developers of wrist-worn light displays
and - if implemented - will add to a higher acceptance of
the displays by users and observers. We assume users will
feel more comfortable using a light display in everyday life,
observers will be less confused and less distracted, and that

ﬁnally, this will increase the time lapse for which people use
the wearable display.

From our experiences we conclude that it is worthwhile
to include observers in the design process and evaluation
of wearable user interfaces because they can have diﬀerent
experiences than the actual users.
Integrating both per-
spectives is particularly important when designing wearable
interfaces as they are pervasive and thus inﬂuence all people
in proximity.

In future work, we will integrate another button on the
bracelet that allows to manually regulate the light’s bright-
ness, independently from the automatic brightness adapta-
tion. To improve automatic brightness adaptation, we are
interested in investigating in which situations users tend to
manually regulate the brightness, e.g., by measuring lighting
conditions and location information. Furthermore, we want
to investigate how the brightness level should adapt when
it depends on both, lighting conditions as well as calendar
events. Further, we will reduce user input in that we will
search calendar event titles for certain keywords, so that the
brightness level mapping can happen automatically.

9. REFERENCES
[1] Ahde, P., and Mikkonen, J. Hello: Bracelets

communicating nearby presence of friends. In
Proceedings of PDC ’08, Indiana University (2008),
324–325.

[2] Burns, P., Lueg, C., and Berkovsky, S. Activmon:

Encouraging physical activity through ambient social
awareness. In Proceedings of CHI EA ’12, ACM
(2012), 2363–2368.

[3] Consolvo, S., McDonald, D. W., and Landay, J. A.

Theory-driven design strategies for technologies that
support behavior change in everyday life. In
Proceedings of CHI ’09, ACM (2009), 405–414.

[4] Dey, A. K. Understanding and using context. Personal

Ubiquitous Computing 5, 1 (Jan. 2001), 4–7.

[5] Dey, A. K., Salber, D., Abowd, G. D., and Futakawa,

M. The conference assistant: Combining
context-awareness with wearable computing. In
Proceedings of ISWC ’99, IEEE Computer Society
(1999), 21–28.

[6] Fortmann, J., Cobus, V., Heuten, W., and Boll, S.
Waterjewel: Design and evaluation of a bracelet to
promote a better drinking behaviour. In Proceedings of
MUM ’14, ACM (2014), 58–67.

[7] Hansson, R., and Ljungstrand, P. The reminder

bracelet: subtle notiﬁcation cues for mobile devices. In
Proceedings of CHI EA ’00, ACM (2000), 323–324.

[8] Hassenzahl, M., Burmester, M., and Koller, F.
AttrakDiﬀ: Ein Fragebogen zur Messung
wahrgenommener hedonischer und pragmatischer
Qualit¨at. In Mensch & Computer 2003, vol. 57.
Vieweg+Teubner Verlag, 2003, 187–196.

[9] Izard, C. E., Dougheny, F. E., Bloxom, B. M., and
Kotsch, N. E. The diﬀerential emotions scale: A
method of measuring the subjective experience of
discrete emotions. Tech. rep., Nashville: Vanderbilt
University, Department of Psychology, 1974.

[10] Kern, N., and Schiele, B. Context-aware notiﬁcation
for wearable computing. In Proceedings of ISWC ’03,
ISWC ’03, IEEE Computer Society (2003), 223–230.

145[11] Lim, B. Y., Shick, A., Harrison, C., and Hudson, S. E.
Pediluma: Motivating physical activity through
contextual information and social inﬂuence. In
Proceedings of TEI ’11, ACM (2011), 173–180.

[12] Rhodes, B. The wearable remembrance agent: A

system for augmented memory. Personal Technologies
1, 4 (1997), 218–224.

[13] Sawhney, N., and Schmandt, C. Nomadic radio:

Speech and audio interaction for contextual messaging

in nomadic environments. ACM Trans. Comput.-Hum.
Interact. 7, 3 (Sept. 2000), 353–383.

[14] Smith, A. R. Color gamut transform pairs. In

Proceedings of SIGGRAPH ’78, ACM (1978), 12–19.

[15] Starner, T. The challenges of wearable computing:
Part 1. IEEE Micro 21, 4 (July 2001), 44–52.

[16] Williams, A., Farnham, S., and Counts, S. Exploring
wearable ambient displays for social awareness. In
Proceedings of CHI EA ’06, ACM (2006), 1529–1534.

146