Reflective Informatics: Conceptual Dimensions for
Designing Technologies of Reflection

Eric P. S. Baumer
Communication Department and Information Science Department
118 Gates Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
Cornell University
ericpsb@cornell.edu

ABSTRACT
Despite  demonstrated  interest  in  designing  for  reflection,
relatively little work provides a detailed explication of what
exactly  is  meant  by  reflection  or  how  to  design  around  it.
This  paper  fills  that  gap  by  reviewing  and  engaging  with
conceptual  and  theoretical  models  of  reflection,  organized
by  the  disciplinary  and  epistemological  perspectives  each
embodies. Synthesizing across this theoretical background,
the  paper  identifies  three  dimensions  of  reflection:
breakdown,  inquiry,  and  transformation.  Together,  these
dimensions  serve  as  the  foundation  for reflective
informatics,  a  conceptual  approach  that  helps  bring  clarity
and  guidance  to  the  discussion  of  designing  for  reflection.
The  paper  distinguishes  reflective  informatics  by
demonstrating  how  it  both  differs  from  and  complements
existing related work. Finally, the paper provides a critically
reflexive  consideration  of  its  own  latent  assumptions,
especially about the value of reflection, and how they might
impact work on designing for reflection.

Author Keywords
Reflection; reflective informatics; design; reflective HCI.

ACM Classification Keywords
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.

INTRODUCTION
“Without  [reflection]  no  judgment  of  experience  would  be
possible at all.” [25]

Researchers  in  HCI  have  demonstrated  significant  interest
in designing technologies to support reflection [6,15,31,42].
While  it  provides  an  exciting  and  challenging  application
area,  there  persists  a  certain  “fuzziness  in  which  the  term
‘reflection’  is  used  within  the  HCI  community” [15:221].
Indeed,  few  of  the  papers  describing  systems  purported  to

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than ACM  must  be  honored.
Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.

CHI 2015, April 18 - 23 2015, Seoul, Republic of Korea
Copyright  is  held  by  the  owner/author(s).  Publication  rights  licensed  to
ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3145-6/15/04…$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702234

support reflection provide more than a one- or two-sentence
definition  of  the  concept [6,15].  Work  in  this  area  may
benefit  from  a  more  explicit  discussion  of  what  we  mean
when talking about reflection.

Part of the issue may arise from the diverse auspices under
which prior work has been conducted. As mentioned above,
substantial  work  has  already  been  undertaken  in  designing
technologies  of  reflection [6],  so  reflection per  se   is  not
necessarily  novel.  However,  much  of  this  work  remains
somewhat  disjoint,  spanning  applications  from  health  to
education  to  personal  informatics  to  design  support  tools
[15]. Articulating a larger conceptual umbrella under which
this  work  operates  may  facilitate  engagement  with
foundational concepts and theories of reflection.

This  paper,  then,  seeks  to  provide  such  a  conceptual
grounding,  one  that  can  be  relevant  to  and  shared  by  the
disparate  strands  of  work  around  designing  for  reflection.
After reviewing previous approaches to reflection in HCI, it
considers  several  theoretical  approaches,  organized  under
the  various  disciplinary  and  epistemological  perspectives
they  embody,  that  might  prove  useful  in  conceptualizing
what  exactly  we  mean  by  reflection.  Synthesizing  across
these  theories,  the  paper  proposes  the  term reflective
informatics  and  offers  three  dimensions  along  which
computational  and  information  technologies  may  be
designed  to  promote,  foster,  encourage,  or  support
reflection.  These  dimensions  are  explicated  both  through
grounding  in  the  theoretical  literature  on  reflection  and
through  comparison  with  prior  instances  of  designing  for
reflection.  The  paper  concludes  by  taking  a  critical,
reflexive turn, considering its own underlying commitments
and latent assumptions about reflection as well as some of
the  tensions  inherent  in  designing,  and  evaluating,
technologies of reflection.

Crucially,  it  would  be  deleterious  to  use  “reflective
informatics” as a keyword or silo to set reflection-oriented
papers  apart  from  other,  ostensibly  non-reflection-oriented
work.  Rather,  the  term  represents  a  sensibility  toward  the
relationship  between  computational  technology  and
reflective  thought  in  such  a  way  that  highlights  its
permeation  though  and  relevance  in  numerous  different
contexts.  Indeed,  reflection  cannot  and  should  not  be
isolated as its own subfield within HCI. Instead, this paper
works  toward  providing  underpinning  concepts  and
unifying  concerns  that  may  be  readily  applied  to  a  variety

Reflecting Upon Design ReflectionCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea585of  domains,  from  health  to  education  to  personal
informatics. Furthermore, it also aims to elucidate both how
endeavors  to  support  reflection  in  those  disparate  areas
might  share  commonalities  and  how  they  might  mutually
benefit from each others’ insights.

The paper thus makes two primary contributions. First, by
reviewing work on reflection from a variety of disciplines,
it  provides  needed [6,15]  conceptual  and  theoretical
grounding  for  reflection  in  HCI.  Second,  by  synthesizing
across  that  work,  it  suggests  three  specific  dimensions  for
applying these concepts and theories in technology design.

RELATED WORK
This  section  both  demonstrates  reflection  as  a  topic  of
interest  in  HCI  and  considers  some  of  the  ways  in  which
prior work has engaged with the concept. Such work can be
grouped into two broad, partially overlapping strands.

The first strand acknowledges the importance of reflection
in the design process. For example, Schön’s descriptions of
reflective  practice [43]  and  of  design  as  a  reflective
conversation  with  materials [44]  have  been  applied  to
improving  the  quality  of  interaction  design [33].  Value
sensitive  design [18]  emphasizes  designers’  capacity  for
reflection  on  the  value  commitments  embedded  in  (a)
design.  Numerous  approaches  have  been  taken  to
facilitating  reflection  in  the  design  process,  including
(perhaps  somewhat  reflexively)  designing  tools  to  help
designers reflect [see 6 for a review].

A second strand of work, more directly relevant here, deals
with  reflection  among  users.  This  section  reviews  three
approaches  that  explicitly  discuss  reflection  among
technology  users.  For  each,  we  argue  that  the  dimensions
articulated below help fill a gap by providing the theoretical
grounding  and  conceptual  language  necessary  to  engage
with, and design for, reflection [6,15].

Personal Informatics
Reflection  plays  a  central  role  in  the  conceptualization  of
personal informatics. Li et al. define personal informatics as
systems  that  “help  people  collect  personally  relevant
information  for  the  purpose  of self-reflection  and  gaining
self-knowledge” [31:558,  emphasis  added].  In  addition  to
giving reflection a central place in its definition, their model
of  personal  informatics  includes  reflection  as  one  of  five
stages. An individual who (1) has the motivation to examine
her  or  his  personal  information,  (2)  has collected  that
information,  and  (3)  has integrated  it  into  a  meaningful
form(at)  can  then  (4) reflect  on  her  or  his  data.  This
reflection  leads  to  subsequent  (5) action  wherein  the
individual  changes  her  or  his  behavior  (or  perhaps  not)
based on reflections about her or his data and the resultant
increase in self-knowledge.

Reflection,  then,  functions  as  the  impetus  in  personal
informatics that moves the individual from examinations of
her  or  his  data  to  action.  Despite  this  central  importance,

work  on  personal  informatics  provides  relatively  little
detailed  explication  of  what  actually  constitutes  reflection.
For  Li  et  al.,  “looking  at  lists  of  collected  personal
information  or  exploring  or  interacting  with  information
visualizations” [31:562]  is  constitutive  of  reflection.  A
colloquial  definition  such  as  this,  rather  than  one  based  in
previous  theoretical  work  on  reflection,  is  not  itself  a
weakness. However, this definition provides relatively little
guidance in terms of how we might go about designing for
reflection.  The  dimensions  of  reflective  informatics
presented below provide needed conceptual and theoretical
grounding,  along  with  design  strategies  for  each  identified
dimension  of  reflection.  Thus,  this  paper  supplies  both  a
working  definition  of  what  constitutes  reflection  and
guidance as to how we might design for it.

Reflective Design
Reflective  Design [45]  applies  Agre’s  notion  of  critical
technical  practice [1]  to  HCI.  In  so  doing  it  brings
“unconscious  aspects  of  experience  to  conscious  attention,
thereby  making  them  available  for  conscious  choice”
[45:50].  This  approach  involves  designers  identifying
“attitudes,  practices,  values,  and  identities” [45:50]  on
which  existing,  norm-reinforcing  designs  are  often
predicated  and  instead  designing  based  on  alternative
assumptions.  As  one  of  the  few  lines  of  prior  work  to
provide  theoretical  grounding,  Sengers  et  al.  define
reflection  by  drawing  on  “a  Western  tradition  of  critical
reflection [in] Marxism, feminism, racial and ethnic studies,
media studies and psychoanalysis” [45:53]. For example, in
considering  the  design  of  technology  for  a  museum,
B o e h n e r  e t  a l . [9]  identified  one-way  transfer  of
information,  from  curators  to  visitors,  as  the  dominant
paradigm in existing designs. Using reflective design led to
developing alternative technologies that allowed “visitors to
add  their  own  voice  to  the  curator’s  voice” [45:53].  The
influence  of  critical  theory,  and  a  resonance  with  critical
design [14]  (described  further  below),  can  be  seen  here  in
how  this  design  challenges  and  shifts  the  power  relations
between visitors and curators.

While  they  chiefly  emphasize  the  importance  of  reflection
among  designers,  Sengers  et  al. [45]  also  mention  and
discuss the importance of promoting reflection among users
as part of reflective design. However, of the six principles
of  reflective  design,  only  two  explicitly  focus  on  users:
“designers should support users in reflecting on their lives”
and  “dialogic  engagement  between  designers  and  users
through  technology” [45:55–56].  These  principles
acknowledge users primarily in terms of their relationships
with designers. Moreover, they provide little in the way of
practical  guidance  for  designers.  Thus,  an  approach  that
provides explicit dimensions of reflection and concomitant
strategies for designing around those dimensions represents
an important complement to this previous work.

Slow Technology
Much  technology  is  designed  in  service  of  enabling

Reflecting Upon Design ReflectionCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea586efficient  work,  wherein  speed  and  productivity  are  lauded
above almost all else. Hallnäs and Redström [20] explore an
alternative.  Drawing  an  analogy  from  the  distinction
between  fast  food  and  a  gourmet  meal,  they  suggest
countering  existing  “fast”  technology  by  designing  “slow”
technology.  For  example,  consider  “an  electronic  doorbell
that  plays  short  fragments  of  a  very  long  melody”
[20:202]  with  each  ring.  The  doorbell  cannot  be  fully
understood after one use. Doing so takes time, both in terms
of  repeated  use  and  in  terms  of  pausing  to  consider  the
relationships  among  the  melodic  pieces. Another  example,
the  ChatterBox,  is  described  below.  Such  designs,  they
suggest, help make space for reflection.

Slow  technology  provides  a  certain  design  sensibility  that
uses  slowness  to  make  space  for  reflection,  making  it
complementary  to  but  distinct  from  the  dimensions  of
reflection  articulated  here.  Furthermore,  Hallnäs  and
Redström [20]  remain  somewhat  vague  as  to  what
constitutes  reflection.  This  vagueness  is  not  necessarily  a
limitation;  they  may  have  intentionally  avoided
constraining  the  possible  design  space  of  slow  technology.
However,  this  vagueness  also  opens  an  opportunity  to
articulate more fully what we mean by reflection, as is done
is this paper.

THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
To  provide  more  grounded  explication  of  how  we  might
approach  reflection  in  interaction  design,  this  section
describes a variety of conceptual and theoretical approaches
to  reflection.  An  exhaustive  review  of  such  work  far
exceeds  the  scope  and  space  constraints  of  this  paper [see,
e.g.,  16,34].  Instead,  this  section  revolves  around  various
disciplinary-epistemological  approaches  to  reflection.
Researchers  in  a  range  of  disciplines—from  philosophy  to
psychology  to  education—have  provided  a  variety  of
conceptual  and  theoretical  tools  for  thinking  about  and
analyzing  reflection.  Organizing  this  work  in  terms  of
discipline  and  epistemology  helps  us  see  not  only
commonalities  but  also  differences  among  these  various
approaches.

Note  that  this  paper  does  not  argue  that  any  single
conceptualization  of,  epistemological  approach  to,  or
theoretical  framework  for  reflection should  be  used  as  an
underpinning to designing for reflection. Indeed, each of the
following have strengths and limitations in terms of guiding
design. Rather than championing one approach or another,
this paper instead suggests that greater insight with respect
to  informing  design  can  be  gleaned  by  identifying
differences  between  and,  moreover,  commonalities  among
these theoretical approaches.

Philosophical
One of the original considerations of reflection in Western
philosophy  comes  from  Kant [25].  He  begins  his
philosophical investigations by arguing for the existence of
two  types  of  mental  faculties.  The  first,  Understanding,

involves comprehension of and reasoning about (or as Kant
calls  it  "legislating")  the  domain  of  the  natural  world. The
primary  role  of  understanding  is  the  identification  and
application  of  natural  laws  that  necessitate  how  the  world
works.  The  second  mental  faculty,  Reason,  has  the  moral
world  as  its  legislative  domain.  Reason  involves  the
identification and application of moral laws based on what
freedoms of action are and are not possible with respect to
human  desire.  Later,  Kant  extended  this  framework  to
include  a  third  faculty  of  Judgment  that  mediates  between
nature  and  morality,  between  the  natural  world  and  the
world  of  human  desire.  It  is  our  faculty  of  judgment,  he
argues,  that  enables  notions  of  aesthetics  and  beauty,  i.e.,
the application of human desire to the natural world.

“The  power  of  judgment  in  general  is  the  faculty  for
thinking of the particular as contained under the universal”
[25:Intro.  IV,  5:179].  Of  this  faculty  of  judgment,  Kant
describes two kinds. In instances where the universal (e.g.,
a law) is given, then the judgment that operates to subsume
particular  instances  under  that  universal  is  referred  to  as
determining  or  as  “determinant  judgment.”  “If,  however,
only the particular is given, for which the universal is to be
found,  then  the  power  of  judgment  is  merely  reflecting”
[25:Intro.  IV,  5:179]  or  “reflective  judgment.”  Universals
arising thusly do not derive directly from nature, otherwise
they  would  be  considered  given.  Rather,  the  reflecting
power  of  judgment  itself  generates  and  gives  rise  to  such
universals.  Kant  places  great  significance  on  this  capacity,
suggesting  at  one  point  that  all  empirical  concepts  derive
from  it  and  that  “without  [this  reflecting  power]  no
judgment of experience would be possible at all” [25:FI V
20:212].

Another  example  comes  from  Dewey’s [12]  discussion  of
reflective  thought,  which  places  significant  importance  on
reflection as a fundamentally important type of thinking. He
defines reflective thought as “active, persistent, and careful
consideration of any belief or supposed form of knowledge
in  the  light  of  the  grounds  that  support  it,  and  the  further
conclusions to which it tends” [12:6].

This  type  of  thought  occurs  through  five  distinct  steps.
First,  it  begins  with  “the  inherently  doubtful—with  the
confusing,  obscure,  or  conflictual  situation” [12:121].  The
second  step,  identifying  and  defining  the  nature  of  the
perplexing  situation,  may  coincide  with  the  first  step.  The
third  step  involves  suggestion  of  possible  explanations.  In
the  fourth  step,  the  implications  or  consequences  of  each
potential  explanation  are  generated  and  considered.  The
fifth  and  final  step  compares  these  implications  with  the
troubling  situation  to  verify  which,  if  any,  of  the  potential
explanation can account for it.

Dewey  describes  this  puzzle-testing  process  occurring  in
even the most quotidian of situations, from navigating a city
in order to arrive at an appointment on time (“I was down
on 16th St. [at 12:20 and] I had an engagement at 124th St.,
at one o’clock” [12:69] p. 69), to puzzling out why bubbles

Reflecting Upon Design ReflectionCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea587form  on  the  outsides  of  freshly  washed  glass  tumblers
placed  upside-down  (“Air  from  outside  must  have  been
expanded  by  the  heat  of  the  tumbler” [12:71]).  Dewey
devotes  much  focus  to  the  training  of  (reflective)  thought,
especially  the  conduct  and  goals  of  education,  which
accounts  for  his  influence  in  scholarship  on  the  role  of
reflection  in  education [e.g.,  17,36],  to  which  we  return
below.

Cognitive
Another  series  of  approaches  to  reflection  comes  from
cognitive  and  developmental  psychology.  From  this
perspective,  reflection  is  seen  as  a  particular  type  of
cognition,  differentiated  from  others  by  its  non-automatic
character.  Many  dual-process  models [24]  describe  two
general modes of thought. The first, the automatic system,
is responsible for quick, instinctive, or reactive decisions in
our everyday activities. Indeed, drawing on prospect theory
[23],  Thaler  and  Sunstein [48]  acknowledge  that  much  of
the  thought  conducted  by  this  system  is  more  likely  to  be
seen  as  instinct  than  as  “thinking.”  In  contrast,  decisions
made  by  the  reflective  system  occur  slowly,  with  much
deliberation  and  conscious  intentionality.  Thaler  and
Sunstein,  though,  focus  primarily  on  using  “nudges”  to
influence  decisions  made  by  people’s  automatic  system,
making their work not as directly relevant here.

In  a  similar  example,  Norman [38]  differentiates  between
what  he  calls  experiential  cognition  and  reflective
cognition.  The  former  deals  with  “a  state  in  which  we
perceive  and  react  to  the  events  around  us  efficiently  and
effortlessly” [38:16].  Reflective  cognition,  on  the  other
hand, deals with intentional thought, decision making, and,
crucially, “new ideas [and] novel responses” [ibid.]. While
he acknowledges this bipartite treatment of cognition as an
oversimplification,  Norman  goes  on  to  suggest  that  much
work  in  technology  design  focuses  too  greatly  on
experiential  cognition.  Incorporating  a  greater  balance  of
support  for  reflective  cognition,  he  suggests,  can  facilitate
the  design  of  technologies  that  better  draw  out  humanity’s
creative capacity.

Other cognitive approaches are more fine-grained. King and
Kitchener [26] developed a stage-based model of what they
call reflective judgment describing how people come to be
(more) reflective (without explicit invocation of Kant’s [25]
notion of reflective judgment described above). Rather than
two  modes,  reflective  and  non-reflective,  their  model
consists  of  seven  stages.  In  the  pre-reflective  stages,
“knowledge is assumed to exist absolutely and concretely”
[26:48]  in  the  world  and  thus  needs  to  justification.  More
reflective  stages  are  characterized  by  an  acknowledgment
of the contingency of knowledge. Knowledge is rarely seen
as  absolutely  right  or  wrong  but  rather  more  or  less
reasonable,  based  on  the  arguments  made  and  evidence
available.

problems  involving  significant  uncertainty.  For  such
problems,  solutions  cannot  be  “described  with  a  high
degree of completeness,” nor can the problem be “resolved
with  a  high  degree  of  certainty” [26:11].  For  example,  the
question  of  whether  or  not  the  ancient  Egyptians  had  the
mathematical knowledge, the necessary tools, and adequate
power  sources  to  build  the  pyramids  can  be  seen  as  ill-
structured.  A  non-reflective  response  would  indicate  that,
because the pyramids are in Egypt, the Egyptians must have
built  the  pyramids.  A  more  reflective  response  might
acknowledge, as one participant did, that “right and wrong
are  not  comfortable  categories  [here…]  it’s  more  or  less
likely or reasonable, more or less in keeping with what the
facts  seem  to  be” [26:72].  Thus,  in  this  view,  reflection
enables  reasonable,  evidence-based  decision  making,  even
in the face of uncertainty.

Educational
The potential relationship between education and reflection
can  be  seen  in  some  of  the  work  above.  Dewey
[12]  specifically  describes  the  importance  of  reflective
thought  in  education.  Norman [38] suggests that education
functions  best  when  combining  a  balance  of  experiential
cognition  and  reflective  cognition.  Much  of  King  and
Kitchener’s [26]  empirical  work  examines  how  reflective
judgment  develops  as  individuals  move  from  primary  and
secondary  education  through  university  and  into  post
graduate education. Indeed, several other scholars articulate
deep  connections  between  education  and  reflection [e.g.,
17,27,36,37,43], two of which are described here.

For Moon, “reflection is intimately linked with the process
of  learning” [37:100]. She describes reflection as a mental
process  or,  at  times,  a  mental  function,  taking  as  inputs
things  that  are  already  known  to  the  individual  and
producing  as  output  greater  understanding.  Thus,
“reflection  [is]  a  secondary  action  on  already  learnt
material” [37:159], a reprocessing of knowledge or theories
that  may  itself  produce  further  knowledge  or  theories.  In
this  way,  reflection  represents  a  form  of  deeper  learning,
involved  not  only  in  making  meaning  but  in  what  Moon
calls “working with meaning.” Thus, reflection is integral to
what  Kolb [27]  calls  “deep  learning,”  i.e.,  learning  that
transforms experience into knowledge.

Focusing  more  on  the  informal  education  of  professionals
and  professionalization,  Schön’s [43]  investigation  of
reflection  studies  how  professionals  think.  His  interests  lie
in  what  he  refers  to  as  “the  epistemology  of  practice”
[43:vii],  that  is,  the  kinds  of  knowing  that  professionals
evidence  through  the  conduct  of  their  practice.  In  many
ways, this focus resembles tacit knowledge, when there are
things  we  know  but  “we  cannot  say  what  it  is  that  we
know” [43:49].  This  knowledge  is  not  abstract  but  is
knowledge  in  doing,  or,  as  Schön  puts  it,  “knowing-in-
action.”

Reflective  judgment,  King  and  Kitchener [26]  suggest,
provides  greatest  value  in  situations  of  ill-structured

Schön  describes  a  number  of  examples,  ranging  from
professional  baseball  pitchers  “finding  the  groove  […]

Reflecting Upon Design ReflectionCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea588studying  [their]  winning  habits  and  trying  to  repeat  them
every time [they] perform” [43:54], to an investment banker
who  acknowledges  that  operating  numbers  “allow  him  to
calculate ‘only 20 to 30 percent of the risk in investment’”
[43:63]. Situations of reflection are often precipitated by the
unexpected,  and  such  “reflection  tends  to  focus
interactively  on  the  outcomes  of  action,  the  action  itself,
and  the  intuitive  knowing  implicit  in  the  action” [43:56].
This  conception  creates  an  inextricable,  dialogic  link
between reflection and action; reflection is not an abstract,
heady  activity  but  is  intimately  intertwined  with  the
performance  of  action.  This  kind  of  reflection-in-action,
Schön  argues,  moves  beyond  positivist-based  technical
rationality  to  grapple  with  “situations  of  uncertainty,
instability, uniqueness, and value conflict” [43:49].

Critical
Work in a fourth epistemological paradigm does not always
use the term “reflection” but nonetheless shares many goals
and  sensibilities  with  other  work  reviewed  here.  Critical
design “asks carefully crafted questions and makes us think,
[…]  its  purpose  is  to  stimulate  discussion  and  debate”
[14:58].  Put  another  way,  “critical  design  [means]  things
that make you think” [8:501].

The  epistemological  paradigm  underlying  critical  design
derives largely from critical theory. This perspective neither
sees  knowledge  as  externally  existent  and  objectively
knowable in the style of positivist epistemology, nor does it
see knowledge as a fully intersubjective social construction
in  the  style  of  interpretivist  epistemology.  Instead,  critical
approaches consider knowledge as contingent upon, and in
many  ways  arising  from,  the  particular  historical
circumstances  and  power  structures  in  which  that
knowledge  is  created [39]. While  a  detailed  explication  of
critical theory exceeds this paper's scope, the application of
critical  perspectives  in  design [cf.  3,4]  bears  relevance  to
reflection. Specifically, critical design represents a means of
drawing  attention  to,  and  arguably  encouraging  reflection
on,  the  power  dynamics  and  historical  contingencies  on
which knowledge is predicated.

The  influence  of  critical  approaches  can  be  seen  in  recent
developments in HCI [e.g., 3,4,20,22,45]. However, critical
designers  do  not  always  use  the  term  “reflection”  to
describe  the  experiences  they  hope  to  evoke.  Indeed,  a
recent review of reflection in HCI found few, if any, critical
design papers that self-identified as pertaining to reflection
[6].  Nonetheless,  we  include  critical  approaches  here  for
two  reasons.  First,  they  provide  an  important
epistemological alternative to other approaches dominant in
HCI [cf.  39]. Second, they demonstrate that interest in the
phenomena  of  reflection  exist  in  HCI  beyond  work  that
self-identifies as being about reflection.

Summary Notes
Before  moving  on  to  consider  how  these  theoretical
approaches can be leveraged to inform design, it is valuable

to  note  some  comparisons  and  contrasts  enabled  by  the
epistemological grouping used here.

First,  in  both  the  philosophical  and  cognitive  approaches,
reflection  is  seen  as  a  largely  mental,  almost  exclusively
individual  activity.  Dewey’s [12]  descriptions  in  his
examples  of  reflective  thought  foreground  vividly  the
i n d i v i d u a l ,  i n t e r n a l  a s p e c t s.  L i k e w i se ,  K a n t ’s
[25] discussion of reflection arises during an explicit focus
on  mental  faculties.  This  focus  also  appears  salient  in
cognitive  frameworks  that  emphasize  the  role  reflection
plays  (or  at  times  does  not  play)  in  individual  decision
making [48].  Similarly,  King  and  Kitchener’s [26]  model
describes individual cognitive development.

In contrast, educational approaches at least mention, if not
emphasize,  social  (inter)action.  For  example,  Schön’s
[43]  case  study  of  town  planners  shows  that  they  do  not
work  in  isolation;  rather,  their  reflection  is  embedded  in  a
complex  milieux  of  regulatory  systems,  advocacy  groups,
etc.  Furthermore,  these  practitioners’  reflection  occurs  not
primarily through internal mental activities but “in action,”
in  the  conduct  of  their  work.  For  Freire [17],  the
sociopolitical contexts give reflection not only its shape but
also  its  purpose.  Similarly,  “critical  design  takes  as  its
medium  social,  psychological,  cultural,  technical  and
economic  values,  in  an  effort  to  push  the  limits  of  lived
experience” [14:58].

Second, these approaches differ in the value judgments they
make  about  reflection.  Cognitive  approaches  clearly  imply
reflective thought as often preferable to or even superior to
“automatic” [48]  or  “pre-reflective” [26]  thinking.
Simultaneously,  though,  they  acknowledge  both  the  value
of  the  rapid  decision  making  that  comes  with  such
automatic  thought  and  the  impossibility  of  constantly
engaging  in  reflective  thought [38,48].  Critical  approaches
also  value  reflection  for  its  potential  to  challenge  existing
sociocultural norms.

In  contrast,  philosophical  approaches  do  not  make  such
expressly  clear  value  judgments  about  the  preferability  of
reflective  thought.  For  Kant [25],  reflective  judgment
represents one mode of being, one particular way in which
an individual experiences and interacts with the world that
accounts  for  the  ability  to  navigate  relationships  between
abstract  generalizations  and  particular  concrete
instantiations.  Despite  the  importance  Kant  places  on
reflective  judgment,  he  does  not  suggest  that  individuals
should (or perhaps even could) be “more” reflective.

SOME DIMENSIONS OF REFLECTIVE INFORMATICS
Rather  than  arguing  for  or  against  the  use  of  any  one  of
these  theoretical  approaches  or  conceptual  models,  this
section moves from contrasts to consider commonalities. In
some  ways,  this  strategy  resembles  that  of  Fleck  and
Fitzpatrick [15],  who  review  literature  on  reflection  to
enumerate  five  levels  of  increasing  reflectivity.  However,
rather than suggest means of designing for more reflection,

Reflecting Upon Design ReflectionCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea589this  section  synthesizes  across  the  different  perspectives
reviewed  above  to  distill  several  common  elements. These
commonalities serve as dimensions that can help guide the
design of technologies for reflection.

These dimensions are not intended as prescriptive, i.e., they
do  not  tell  designers  what  to  do.  Nor  do  the  dimensions
constitute  a  phase-  or  stage-based  model  of  reflection;  the
reflecting  individual  need  not  necessarily  progress  linearly
from  each  dimension  to  the  next.  However,  they  are  not
totally  independent  of  one  another,  either,  as  described
further  below.  Finally,  this  section  articulates some
dimensions  of  reflective  informatics.  Future  work,
especially  both  design  work  and  empirical  studies  of
reflection,  may  identify  valuable  revisions,  limitations,  or
alternatives  to  these  dimensions.  Rather,  these  dimensions
provide a series of generative conceptual tools that can help
inform  or  perhaps  inspire  design.  In  addition  to  grounding
each dimension in the theoretical work reviewed above, this
section  also  provides  examples  of  previous  work  on
designing  for  reflection. These  examples  both  demonstrate
how  each  dimension  may  play  out  in  practice  and  provide
design strategies for addressing each dimension. Ultimately,
these  dimensions  helps  establish  common  ground,
advancing the discussion both of what exactly we mean by
reflection and of how to design for it.

Breakdown
Instances  of  reflection  are  often  precipitated  by  various
types  of  breakdowns.  Dewey [12]  emphasizes  doubtful  or
puzzling  situations.  Schön  considers  situations  of  surprise,
uncertainty,  or  conflict  where  “there  is  some  puzzling,  or
troubling,  or  interesting  phenomenon” [43:50].  Making  an
analogy to Kuhn’s notion of paradigm shifts [29], Mezirow
[36] focuses on “disturbing anomalies” that do not fit with
an individual’s current meaning perspectives.

Why  are  breakdowns  important  moments  with  respect  to
reflection?  The  importance  of  breakdowns  in  other
intellectual  traditions  provides  some  suggestions.
Ethnomethodology [19],  for  example,  focuses  on
breakdown  and  repair  as  moments  when  the  tacit,  implicit
social  structuring  of  interaction  must  be  explicated  by  its
interactors.  Similar  resonance  can  be  seen  with  the
phenomenological  distinction  between  ready-to-hand,
wherein  a  tool  is  used  so  unconsciously  as  to  feel  like  an
extension of the self, and present-at-hand, wherein a tool is
examined  consciously  for  its  own  properties [21].  Such
changes  from  ready-to-hand  to  present-at-hand  are  often
precipitated  by  moments  when  the  tool  ceases  to  function
normally. Such conscious and explicit consideration of that
which  was  previously  unconscious  and  implicit,  similar  to
the  reflective  modes  in  dual  process  models  of  cognition
[23,24,38,48], acts to provide opportunities for reflection.

Taking breakdowns into account when designing may mean
at  least  two  things.  First,  as  noted  elsewhere  e.g., [13,46],
providing  support  for  breakdowns  can  help  technological
tools better align with human practices. In some instances,

such  support  may  also  help  facilitate  reflection.  Second,
perhaps somewhat more provocatively, drawing attention to
or even inducing breakdowns may provide opportunities for
moments of reflection. “Unless there is something doubtful,
the  situation  is  read  off  at  a  glance” [12:102].  Critical
design  takes  a  similar,  if  more  measured,  approach  to
breakdown  by  striving  for  a  “slight  strangeness  […]  too
weird  and  [designs]  are  instantly  dismissed,  not  strange
enough and they're absorbed into everyday reality” [14:63].
Thus,  drawing  attention  to  or  even  creating  moments  of
perplexity and doubt may prove a useful design strategy.

Examples
While breakdown plays a central role in several conceptual
and  theoretical  approaches  to  HCI  design [e.g.,  13],
designing explicitly for breakdown in support of reflection
occurs  less  often.  As  one  example,  some  of  the  work  in
personal  informatics [31]  is  predicated  on  breakdowns,
often  via  comparison  either  with  a  user's  own  past  data,
such  as  task  performance [e.g.,  35],  or  data  from  other
users,  such  as  related  search  queries [e.g.,  5].  Such
breakdowns  resonate  primarily  with  the  cognitive  and
educational perspectives reviewed above. Another example,
ShoddyPop [32],  randomly  delays  the  delivery  of  email
messages. Doing so arguably alleviates the onus to respond
quickly,  since  the  recipient  will  not  receive  the  reply
immediately, thus making time and space for reflection [cf.
20]  on  the  content  of  the  exchange.  This  example  aligns
more closely with philosophical and, to some extent, critical
accounts of reflection.

All these examples work by violating expectations. That is,
the  designer  identifies  an  expectation  the  user  is  likely  to
hold.  The  system  then  renders  that  expectation  inaccurate,
either by suggesting that the expectation does not hold or by
intentionally  violating  the  expectation.  Doing  so  implicitly
suggests that the expectation warrants closer examination.

Inquiry
Another important aspect in many frameworks of reflection
is  the  process  of  conscious,  intentional  inquiry.  Such
processes  figure  prominently  in  both  Kant’s [25] notion of
reflective  judgment  and  Dewey’s [12]  description  of
reflective  thought.  The  whole  process  he  describes  of
examining why fog forms on freshly washed glass tumblers
[12:71]  exemplifies  a  process  of  inquiry,  of  generating,
testing,  revising,  and  further  testing  hypotheses.  Indeed,
Dewey at times refers to his conceptualization of reflection
as a process of inquiry.

Inquiry  plays  a  similarly  important  role  in  educational
approaches  to  reflection.  In  Moon’s [37]  description,
reflection  involves  re-examination  of  things—concepts,
ideas,  theories,  etc.—already  learned,  i.e.,  inquiry  on
existing  knowledge.  Inquiry  also  takes  a  central  place  for
Freire [17], though for him inquiry focuses on the political,
social, and cultural contexts of learning.

Among  cognitive  approaches,  this  idea  of  inquiry  occurs

Reflecting Upon Design ReflectionCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea590most  saliently  in  King  and  Kitchener’s [26]  work.  In
particular,  their  emphasis  on  the  nature  of  knowledge  and
the  basis  of  justification  for  that  knowledge  essentially
represents a particular type of inquiry. In contrast to Thaler
and  Sunstein’s [48]  reflective  mode  or  Norman’s
[38]  reflective  cognition,  inquiry  for  King  and  Kitchener
examines not knowledge itself but the origins thereof, i.e.,
epistemological inquiry.

Critical  approaches  often  spur  inquiry  into  the  values
underlying  design.  Indeed,  critical  design  often  employs
“value fictions” wherein dominant values are subverted, for
example,  challenging  the  masculine-dominant  gender
norms  of  a  gym [4].  Such  subversions  can  (though  not
always do) provoke inquiry into the normative values being
challenged.

Thus, designing for reflection means creating opportunities
for,  as  well  as  supporting,  inquiry.  Doing  so  could  take
many  forms.  Taking  after  Dewey [12],  a  design  could
enable  and  encourage  a  process  of  iterative  hypothesis
testing  and  refinement.  Resembling  Moon [37],  a  design
might focus on the explication of what a user already knows
to  encourage  reflective  re-examination  of  that  knowledge.
Bardzell et al. [4] suggest that inquiry may result less from
the  design per  se  and  more  from  dialog  between
participants  and  researchers.  Drawing  on  King  and
Kitchener [26],  a  design  could  emphasize  inquiry  into  the
origins  of  knowledge  and  the  evidence  provided  therefor.
Keeping  in  mind  Schön’s  notion  of  reflection-in-action
[43], such inquiry need not be entirely abstract or cognitive
but may occur tacitly in the process of interacting with the
system.

Examples
Prior approaches to inquiry become most apparent in work
that  focuses  on  reviewing  (and  reflecting  on)  past
experience(s). For example, Wandering Mind [40] attempts
to  promote  reflection  by  encouraging  exploration  of  old
journal entries. The personal informatics systems mentioned
above as triggering breakdown often subsequently allow or
encourage  users’  inquiry  into  their  data,  demonstrating  the
interdependence  among  dimensions.  Inquiry  becomes
especially notable in work involving group discussion. For
example,  Prilla  et  al. [41]  describe  a  system  that  supports
stroke ward staff in reflecting on conversations with family
members  of  patients.  The  design  focuses  on  users
(re)examining  notes  about  their  experiences,  as  well  as
subsequent group discussion. Arias et al. describe a system
for  collaborative  civic  design  that  explicitly  includes  a
reflection space for “present[ing] information related to the
problem  at  hand  for  exploration  and  extension” [2:95].
Thus, the design designates a separate space specifically for
inquiry.  ConsiderIt [28]  similarly  distinguishes  between
statements  either  supporting  or  opposing  state  ballot
measures  and  the  arguments  to  support  those  statements.
Doing so allows for further investigation or examination of
the arguments and the statements they support.

From  these,  we  can  draw  out  three  design  strategies  for
supporting  inquiry.  First,  a  design  may  incorporate  review
of  past  experiences.  Second,  a  design  can  designate  a
particular  space  for  inquiry  separate  from  the  primary
activities  to  which  that  inquiry  pertains.  Third,  group
discussions  may  prove  an  effective  means  of  promoting
reflective inquiry.

Transformation
Reflection  ultimately  involves  change.  It  is  not  only  about
examining  the  current  state  of  the  world  or  one’s  self  but
also about envisioning alternatives.

For  educational  scholars [10,27,37],  reflection  transforms
experience into learning. Especially for Moon, reflection is
a process of refining previous learning, that is, transforming
understanding. For Kant, reflective judgment is that which
reorders our conceptual schema. Reflection occurs precisely
when  our  existing  conceptual  schema  do  not  apply  (or  do
not apply well) and thus we need to reschematize nature in
order to come to a (better) understanding of it.

Schön's  reflective  practitioners  often  transform  their
understanding  of  a  situation.  For  example,  an  investment
banker  found  himself  leery  of  an  opportunity  with  a  large
Latin American bank where “the bank's operating numbers
seemed satisfactory” [43:63] but he still felt an unease. The
investor realized that “he had been treated with a degree of
deference  out  of  all  proportion  with  his  actual  position”
[43:64].  This  reflection  altered  his  understanding  of  the
situation, and he chose to forgo any new investments with
that  bank.  “Some  months  later,  the  bank  went  through  the
biggest bankruptcy ever in Latin America” [43:64].

Cognitive  approaches  that  contrast  reflection  with  more
automatic  thought  processes  grant  reflection  the  ability  to
change  the  rules  by  which  the  automatic  systems  act.  For
example,  heuristic  decisions  often  function  based  on  loss
aversion [23], a preference for avoiding losses over seeking
gains.  Reflective  decision  making,  however,  enables
decision making that is not subject to such biases [24].

Critical  approaches  involve  not  only  questioning
fundamental  assumptions  but  exploring  alternatives.  Value
fictions [14]  represent  one  type  of  transformation  enabled
by  critical  design.  Transformational  products  “attempt  to
actively  shape  their  users’  attitudes” [30]. An  emphasis  on
transformation  is  also  evident  in  Freire’s [17]  arguments
about social change based on critical reflection.

Examples
Of  the  dimensions  described  here,  transformation  likely
poses  the  most  difficult  challenge  to  designers.
Transformation  involves  change  to  the  fundamental,  basic
conceptualization  of  a  situation,  such  as  in  Kant's
reschamitization [25] or critical design's value fictions [14].
A design, however, often embodies a particular (i.e., single)
stance  or  conceptualization  of  a  situation.  Designing  for
transformation,  then,  requires  that  the  design  be  at  least

Reflecting Upon Design ReflectionCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea591comprehensible  (and  perhaps  usable  and/or  useful)  when
approached with different conceptualizations.

Consider  Hallnäs  and  Redström's  ChatterBox [20].  The
system randomly concatenates snippets of text mined from
office emails and displays them as isolated statements, e.g.,
“To participate in the burglar it will be necessary to register
for  the  i3 Annual,”  or,  somewhat  more  intriguingly,  “Who
else  is  to?”  If  approached  as  a  tool  to  increase  efficiency
and  productivity,  i.e.,  as  “fast”  technology,  the  ChatterBox
seems  nearly  incomprehensible.  Instead,  the  system
requires  a  transformation  of  the  user's  perspective  to  one
that  allows  for  slow  technologies,  that  is,  it  requires
“slowness in learning, understanding and presence [giving]
people  time  to  think  and  reflect” [20:203].  Importantly,
such  transformation  could  not  occur  without  breakdowns
triggered  by  the  system’s  inscrutable  sentences,  again
illustrating  interconnections  among  the  dimensions.  In  a
related vein, Cheng et al. apply a similar stance on slowness
and  reflection  in  the  design  of  GoSlow [11],  mobile
application  that  encourages  moments  of  solitary
contemplation.  Their  evaluation  of  the  system,  however,
suggests that a gap may exist between simply pausing, i.e.,
going slow, and fundamental transformation.

Similarly,  the  lens  of  transformation  provides  for  multiple
interpretations  of  ChatterBox.  On  the  one  hand,  one  could
see  ChatterBox  as  designed  for  transformation  in  that  in
requires  a  transformation  from  the  normative  approach  to
technology in order to make sense of it. On the other, one
could  argue  that  ChatterBox  does  not  support
transformation  in  that  it  requires  users  take  one  particular
approach  rather  than  supporting  the  user  as  s/he  moves
through the experience of transformation.

DISCUSSION AND FUTURE
In the spirit of reflection, this section takes a reflexive turn
on  the  paper  itself.  That  is,  it  calls  out  some  of  the
assumptions  underlying  the  paper  (i.e.,  it  incites
breakdown),  examines  the  implications  thereof  (i.e.,  it
conducts  inquiries),  and  considers  potential  alternatives
(i.e.,  it  proposes  transformation).  Doing  so  does  not  cause
the paper to undermine itself; rather it ensures that the ideas
herein  are  presented  with  a  degree  of  humility,
acknowledges  the  paper’s  underlying  value  commitments,
and suggests important areas for future investigation.

Reflection  as  Valuable  –  First  and  foremost,  this  paper  is
predicated on the assumption that reflection is valuable and
that engaging in it is desirable. Given the extent of work on
reflection  in  both  interaction  design [6,15,42]  and  other
areas [16,34],  this  assumption  seems  hardly  exceptional.
However,  considering  its  ramifications  and  alternative
guiding  assumptions  may  be  illuminating.  Situations  may
exist  in  which  reflection  is  less  valuable  or  perhaps  even
harmful. A doctor at the operating table, for example, might
benefit  from  reflection-in-action [43]  related  to  the
procedures  s/he  is  conducting,  but  s/he  may  become
distracted  from  the  task  at  hand  by  reflection  on  the

economic and sociopolitical inequalities perpetuated by her
or his country’s health care system. One could even imagine
a  sort  of  “paralysis  by  analysis”  in  which  an  individual  or
group  becomes  so  consumed  by  reflecting—on  their
assumptions,  value  commitments,  biases,  etc.—that  it
becomes  difficult  if  not  impossible  for  them  to  come  to  a
meaningful  resolution.  Granted,  given  the  close  linkages
between  reflection  and  action  argued  for  by  some [17,43],
such situations may be unlikely. Other conceptualizations of
reflection [e.g.,  12]  may  certainly  allow  such  paralysis  by
analysis as a possibility.

Power  and  Privilege  – This  paper  also  does  not  explicitly
address  questions  about  the  potentially  privileged  position
of reflection. Who is granted the opportunity to reflect, by
whom, and under what conditions? The critical approaches
reviewed here speak to some of these concerns [14,17,45].
For  Freire [17],  the  capacity  for  reflection  does  not
necessarily  derive  solely  from  positions  of  power.  Rather,
given  an  appropriate  pedagogical  approach,  reflection,
particularly  critical  reflection  on  the  power  dynamics
between  oppressors  and  the  oppressed,  can  become  a  tool
for  and  means  of  empowerment.  While  fully  addressing
these issues exceeds this paper’s scope, such sociopolitical
concerns  should  remain  central  to  work  on  designing  for
reflection.

Evaluation  –  Finally,  evaluation  poses  a  highly  complex
challenge.  How  does  one  evaluate  technologies  of
reflection?  Trying  to  determine  when  an  individual  (or
group)  is  being  “more  reflective”  seems  at  best  a
misconstrual  of  the  value  of  reflection  and  at  worst  a
harmful and deleterious reduction of an incredibly intricate
phenomenon [cf.  47].  Instead,  this  paper  suggests  three
approaches that may prove more suitable.

First, rather than trying to determine how much reflection a
person is demonstrating, we might instead ask in what ways
an  individual  (or  group)  is  reflecting  (or  not  reflecting).
Aspects  of  either  King  and  Kitchener’s [26]  or  Fleck  and
Fitzpatrick’s [15]  frameworks  could  be  used  to  describe
which types of reflective thought occur in what contexts. In
both  cases,  though,  it  would  be  difficult  to  avoid  the
temptation  of  seeing  a  technology  of  reflection  as  more
effective  because  users  engaged  in  styles  of  reflection
associated  with  higher  stages  in  the  model.  Alternatively,
one  could  hinge  such  an  evaluation  on  the  dimensions
articulated  here.  Perhaps,  for  example,  experiences  with  a
technology  provide  strong  evidence  for  acknowledging
breakdowns  but  less  evidence  of  inquiry.  Moving  thusly
from  quantification  to  qualification  may  help  grapple  with
reflection’s complexity. Furthermore, doing so may provide
valuable  revisions  to  or  extensions  of  the  dimensions
articulated here.

Second,  rather  than  attempting  to  assess  reflection per  se,
one  could  instead  ask  what  role  reflection  plays  in  the
broader  contexts  in  which  it  occurs.  The  question,  then,
may  become  what  benefits  reflection  provides.  Carrying

Reflecting Upon Design ReflectionCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea592this  approach  too  far,  however,  risks  a  displacement,
wherein  reflection  is  linked  with  some  desired  outcome
(e.g.,  increased  learning,  improved  performance),  and
assessment  of  that  outcome  is  taken  as  evidence  that
reflection  occurred [6].  Making  a  comparison  between
evaluating  reflection  and  evaluating  art,  Hallnäs  and
Redström  suggest  that  “one  cannot  explain  what  a
symphony  by  Beethoven  is  […]  by  empirical  studies  of  a
collection  of  concert  visitors” [20:209].  Similarly,  formal
methods  and  traditional  user  studies  of  people  interacting
with  technologies  of  reflection  may  provide  poor  accounts
of  that  reflection.  Instead,  novel  evaluation  methods  may
need  be  necessary  to  grapple  with  the  broader  contextual
ramifications of reflection.

Finally,  HCI  evaluation  generally  attempts  to  ascertain  the
impacts of design, often asking the question, “Did it work?”
In the context of reflection, focusing on this question may
limit  the  potential  impact  our  studies  of  such  technologies
can have. Instead, we might considering using the design as
a means of deepening our understanding of reflection itself.
Rather than trying to design systems to make people more
reflective,  we  can  seek  to  understand  how  different
interventions  alter  the  nature  of  reflective  thought.  This
approach  suggests  a  move  from  seeing  reflection  as  a
problem area in need of a solution to seeing reflection as a
complex  situation  in  which  we  can  pose  various  design
interventions [cf.  7].  Thus,  avoiding  an  insistence  on
demonstrating  that  our  design  “works”  may  open  up
opportunities  to  understand  more  fully  both  the  nature  of
reflection and the potential impacts of our interventions.

CONCLUSION
Designing for reflection does not represent an entirely novel
endeavor [6,15,31,42].  While  important  prior  work  has
pioneered  this  area,  it  lacks  a  strong  conceptual  and
theoretical  grounding [6,15]. Designers of technologies for
reflection need a common vocabulary for talking about (1)
what  reflection  is  (and,  implicitly,  what  it  is  not)  and  (2)
how we might go about designing for reflection.

This  paper  addresses  that  gap, reviewing  a  range  of
literature  on  reflection  from  a  variety  of  disciplinary  and
epistemological  perspectives.  Focusing  on  commonalities
among these theories, the paper proposes three dimensions
o f reflective  informatics, which  help  articulate  how  design
may support reflection. To help ground the discussion, each
dimension  is  explicated  with  examples  from  existing
systems  and  design  interventions.  These  examples
demonstrate that the dimensions map well onto and help us
understand  better  existing  design  practice.  Furthermore,
comparisons  with  related  approaches  show  how  these
dimensions fill a gap in our existing approaches. Thus, this
paper  provides  an  important  contribution  toward  drawing
work on designing for reflection under a shared conceptual
umbrella, as well as giving that work a common conceptual
language to discuss the unique challenges in designing for
reflection.

Ultimately,  this  paper  not  only  to  provides  a  scaffold  for
designing  for  reflection,  it  also  seeks  to  provoke
conversation  about  and  deeper  engagement  with  the
conceptual  definition  and  theoretical  grounding  of
reflection  in  technology  design.  That  is,  the  theoretical
grounding  of  reflection  should  not  be  seen  as  a  “solved”
problem. Indeed, future work should explicitly engage with
multiple  definitions  of,  theories  of,  and  frameworks  for
reflection in design. Only through such practical application
can  we  hope  to  understand  how  best  to  design  for
reflection.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based in part upon work supported by the
NSF  under  Grant  No.  IIS-1110932.  Thanks  to  Vera
Khovanskaya,  Phoebe  Sengers,  Geri  Gay,  and  the
anonymous reviewers for comments on earlier drafts.

REFERENCES
1.  Agre,  P.E. Computation  and  Human  Experience.

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1997.

2. Arias, E., Eden, H., Fischer, G., Gorman, A., and Scharff,
E. Transcending the Individual Human Mind - Creating
Shared  Understanding  through  Collaborative  Design.
ACM ToCHI 7, 1 (2000), 84–113.

3.  Bardzell,  J.  and  Bardzell,  S.  What  is  “critical”  about
critical  design?. Proc  CHI,  ACM  Press  (2013),  3297–
3306.

4. Bardzell, S., Bardzell, J., Forlizzi, J., Zimmerman, J., and
Antanitis,  J.  Critical  Design  and  Critical  Theory:  The
Challenge  of  Designing  for  Provocation. Proc  DIS,
(2012), 288–297.

5.  Bateman,  S.,  Teevan,  J.,  and  White,  R.W.  The  Search
Dashboard:  How  Reflection  and  Comparison  Impact
Search Behavior. Proc CHI, (2012), 1785–1794.

6.  Baumer,  E.P.S.,  Khovanskaya,  V.,  Matthews,  M.,
Reynolds,  L.,  Sosik,  V.S.,  and  Gay,  G.  Reviewing
Reflection:  On  the  Use  of  Reflection  in  Interactive
System Design. Proc DIS, (2014), 93–102.

7.  Baumer,  E.P.S.  and  Silberman,  M.S.  When  the
Implication  Is  Not  to  Design  (Technology). Proc  CHI,
(2011), 2271–2274.

8. Blevis, E. Stillness and Motion, Meaning and Form. Proc

DIS, (2014), 493–502.

9. Boehner, K., Gay, G., and Larkin, C. Drawing evaluation
into  design  for  mobile  computing:  a  case  study  of  the
Renwick  Gallery’s  Hand  Held  Education  Project. J  of
Digital Libraries 5, 3 (2005), 219–230.

10.  Boud,  D.,  Keogh,  R.,  and  Walker,  D.,  eds. Reflection:
Turning  Experience  into  Learning.  Kogan  Page,
London, 1985.

11.  Cheng,  J.,  Bapat,  A.,  Thomas,  G.,  et  al.  GoSlow:
Designing  for  Slowness,  Reflection  and  Solitude. Proc
CHI Ext. Abst., (2011), 429–438.

Reflecting Upon Design ReflectionCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea59312. Dewey, J. How We Think. A restatement of the relation
of  reflective  thinking  to  the  educative  process.  D.  C.
Heath, Boston, 1933.

13.  Dourish,  P.  and  Button,  G.  On  Technomethodology:
Foundational Relationships between Ethnomethodology
and System Design. Human-Computer Interaction 13, 4
(1998), 395 – 432.

14. Dunne, T. and Raby, F. Design Noir: The Secret Life of

Electronic Objects. Birkhäuser, Berlin, 2001.

15.  Fleck,  R.  and  Fitzpatrick,  G.  Reflecting  on  Reflection:
Framing  a  Design  Landscape. Proc  OZCHI,  (2010),
216–223.

16. Fook, J., White, S., and Gardner, F. Critical reflection: a
review  of  contemporary  literature  and  understandings.
In  S.  White,  J.  Fook  and  F.  Gardner,  eds., Critical
reflection  in  health  and  social  care.  Open  University
Press, Maidenhead, 2006, 3–20.

17.  Freire,  P. The  Pedagogy  of  the  Oppressed.  Seabury,

New York, 1970.

18.  Friedman,  B.,  Kahn,  P.H.,  and  Borning,  A.  Value
Sensitive Design and Information Systems. In P. Zhang
and D. Galletta, eds., Human-Comput Interact in Mgmt
Info Sys. M. E. Sharpe, London, 2003, 348–372.

19.  Garfinkel,  H. Studies  in  Ethnomethodology.  Prentice-

Hall, Englewood-Cliffs, NJ, 1967.

20.  Hallnäs,  L.  and  Redström,  J.  Slow  Technology  –
Designing  for  Reflection. Personal  and  Ubiquitous
Computing 5, 3 (2001), 201–212.

21. Heidegger, M. Being and Time. Harper & Row, 1927.

22. Irani, L., Vertesi, J., Dourish, P., Philip, K., and Grinter,
R.E.  Postcolonial  computing:  a  lens  on  design  and
development. Proc CHI, ACM (2010), 1311–1320.

23.  Kahneman,  D.  and  Tversky,  A.  Prospect  Theory:  An
Analysis  of  Decision  Under  Risk. Econometrica  47,  2
(1979), 263–292.

24.  Kahneman,  D. Thinking,  Fast  and  Slow.  Farrar,  Straus

and Giroux, New York, 2011.

Symposium, (2011).

31. Li, I., Dey, A., and Forlizzi, J. A Stage-Based Model of
Personal  Informatics  Systems. Proc  CHI,  (2010),  557–
566.

32. Lindley, S.E., Harper, R., and Sellen, A. Desiring to be
in  Touch  in  a  Changing  Communications  Landscape:
Attitudes  of  Older  Adults. Proc  CHI,  (2009),  1693–
1702.

33.  Löwgren,  J.  and  Stolterman,  E. Thoughtful  Interaction

Design. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2004.

34.  Lyons,  N.,  ed. Handbook  of  Reflection  and  Reflective

Inquiry. Springer, New York, 2010.

35.  Malacria,  S.,  Scarr,  J.,  Cockburn, A.,  Gutwin,  C.,  and
Grossman,  T.  Skillometers:  Reflective  Widgets  that
Motivate and Help Users to Improve Performance. Proc
UIST, (2013), 321–330.

36.  Mezirow,  J.  How  Critical  Reflection  Triggers
Transformative  Learning.  In  J.  Mezirow,  ed., Fostering
Critical  Reflection  in  Adulthood.  Jossey-Bass,  San
Francisco, 1990, 1–20.

37.  Moon,  J. Reflection  in  Learning  &  Professional
Development. RoutledgeFalmer, Abingdon, Oxon, 1999.

38.  Norman,  D.A. Things  That  Make  Us  Smart.  Perseus

Group, New York, 1993.

39. Orlikowski, W.J. and Baroudi, J.J. Studying Information
Technology in Organizations: Research Approaches and
Assumptions. Info Sys Research 2, 1 (1991), 1–28.

40.  Pirzadeh,  A.,  He,  L.,  and  Stolterman,  E.  Personal
Informatics  and  Reflection:  A  Critical  Examination  of
the Nature. Proc CHI Ext. Abst., (2013), 1979–1988.

41.  Prilla,  M.,  Degeling,  M.,  and  Herrmann,  T.
Collaborative  Reflection  at  Work:  Supporting  Informal
Learning  at  a  Healthcare  Workplace. Proc  GROUP,
(2012), 55–64.

42.  Sas,  C.  and  Dix,  A.  Designing  for  reflection  on
experience. Proc CHI Ext. Abst., (2009), 4741–4744.

43.  Schön,  D.A. The  Reflective  Practitioner.  Basic  Books,

25. Kant, I. Critique of the Power of Judgment. Cambridge

New York, 1983.

University Press, Cambridge, 1790.

26.  King,  P.M.  and  Kitchener,  K.S. Developing  Reflective

Judgment. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 1994.

44.  Schön,  D.A.  Designing  as  reflective  conversation  with
the  materials  of  a  design  situation. Research  in
Engineering Design 3, 3 (1992), 131–147.

27.  Kolb,  D. Experiential  Learning:  Experience  as  the
source  of  learning  and  development.  Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1984.

45.  Sengers,  P.,  Boehner,  K.,  David,  S.,  and  Kaye,  J.
“Jofish.”  Reflective  Design. Proc  Critical  Computing,
(2005), 49–58.

28. Kriplean, T., Morgan, J., Freelon, D., Borning, A., and
Bennett,  L.  Supporting  Reflective  Public  Thought  with
ConsiderIt. Proc CSCW, (2012), 265–274.

29.  Kuhn,  T.S. The  Structure  of  Scientific  Revolutions.

University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1962.

30.  Laschke,  M.,  Hassenzahl,  M.,  and  Diefenbach,  S.
Things with attitude: Transformational Products. Create

46.  Suchman,  L.A. Plans and Situated Actions. Cambridge

University Press, Cambridge, 1987.

47. Sumison, J. and Fleet, A. Reflection: can we assess it?
Should  we  assess  it? Assessment  &  Evaluation  in
Higher Education 21, 2 (1996), 121–130.

48. Thaler, R.H. and Sunstein, C.R. Nudge. Yale University

Press, New Haven, CT, 2008. 

Reflecting Upon Design ReflectionCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea594