Rethinking the Mobile Food Journal:  

Exploring Opportunities for Lightweight Photo-Based Capture 

Felicia Cordeiro1, Elizabeth Bales1,2, Erin Cherry3, James Fogarty1 
3 Computer Science 
University of Rochester 
erinc@cs.rochester.edu

1 Computer Science & Engineering  
2 Human Centered Design & Engineering  
DUB Group, University of Washington  
 {felicia0, lizbales, jfogarty}@cs.washington.edu  

ABSTRACT 
Food  choices  are  among  the  most  frequent  and  important 
health  decisions  in  everyday  life,  but  remain  notoriously 
difficult  to  capture.  This  work  examines  opportunities  for 
lightweight  photo-based  capture  in  mobile  food  journals. 
We first report on a survey of 257 people, examining how 
they define healthy eating, their experiences and challenges 
with  existing  food  journaling  methods,  and  their  ability  to 
interpret  nutritional  information  that  can  be  captured  in  a 
food journal. We then report on interviews and a field study 
with  27  participants  using  a  lightweight,  photo-based  food 
journal  for  between  4  to  8  weeks.  We  discuss  mismatches 
between  motivations  and  current  designs,  challenges  of 
current approaches to food journaling, and opportunities for 
photos as an alternative to the pervasive but often inappropriate 
emphasis on quantitative tracking in mobile food journals. 

Author Keywords 
Personal Informatics; Self-Tracking; Food Journals; Photos. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI). 

INTRODUCTION 
Food  choices  are  among  the  most  frequent  and  important 
health decisions in everyday life, yet it remains notoriously 
difficult to understand our food choices. People eat in many 
different contexts and have widely varying motivations and 
constraints on food. Being mindful of the quality and quantity 
of  food  choices  is  a  crucial  component  of  a  healthy  life 
[35,36],  and  food  journals  can  be  effective  for  monitoring 
food intake [8,15]. The implications of food also go beyond 
health,  as  food  is  central  to  our  daily  experiences  and  our 
relationship with food varies according to personal contexts 
and goals [14]. But food journals impose high burdens that 
detract  from  their  potential  benefit  [11,12].  Effective  food 
journaling is thus a grand challenge for personal informatics. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal 
or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are  not  made  or 
distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice 
and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work 
owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is 
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute 
to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2015, April 18 - 23 2015, Seoul, Republic of Korea 
Copyright 2015 ACM 978-1-4503-3145-6/15/04$15.00 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702154 

Figure  1.  An  entry  in  our  lightweight  photo-based 
food  journal.  No  calorie  or  nutrition  information  is 
shown,  as  the  journal  instead  logs  meal  enjoyment, 
location context, and social context. 

Automated  sensing  has  proven  powerful  in  some  domains 
of human activity, but remains out of reach for food despite 
recent  advances  [1,3,18,27,29,32,38].  It  is  also  unclear 
whether  automation  is  desirable,  as  it  may  undermine 
in-the-moment  awareness  created  by  food  journaling  [36]. 
Some existing methods involve taking photos of food as an 
intermediate  step  toward  collecting  underlying  nutritional 
information  [18,27,38].  We  step  further  back,  asking  what 
people  want  to  capture  about  food  and  what  value  photos 
themselves might provide in a lightweight food journal. 

Our  work  examines  lightweight  photo-based  capture  and 
reflection,  reconsidering  the  common  assumption  that  a 
quantitative  approach  is  required.  We  first  present  a  survey 
examining  how  people  define  healthy  eating,  experiences 
and challenges with existing food journals, and how people 
interpret the healthiness of food presented as either photos 
or  nutrition  labels.  We  then  present  interviews  and  field 
deployments  of  a  lightweight,  photo-based  mobile  food 
journal. A total of 27 people with varying food goals from 
two distinct trials use our application to journal for between 
4 to 8 weeks. We explore reactions to a design focused on 
food photos in lieu of nutritional information and examine 
the value of food photos with regard to their goals. Finally, 
we discuss our results in the context of rethinking challenges 
and opportunities in the design of mobile food journals. 

Understanding Health through Online BehaviorCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea3207 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
The specific contributions of our work include: 
• Examination  of  how  people  define  healthy  eating,  their 
experiences  and  challenges  with  food  journaling,  and 
their interpretation of nutritional information that can be 
captured in a journal. This includes surveying 257 people 
to  define  healthy  eating  and  to  rate  the  healthiness  of 
foods presented as either photos or nutrition labels. 

• A field study examining a lightweight photo-based food 
journal.  Specifically,  we  build  and  deploy DECAF  with 
27  people  with  varying  food  goals  from  two  distinct 
trials,  each  for  between  4  to  8  weeks.  We  examine  the 
challenges participants encounter in journaling relative to 
their  prior  methods,  the  value  they  find  in  photos,  and 
differences according to their food goals. 

• Discussion  of  opportunities  for  lightweight  photo-based 
capture and reflection in mobile food journals. In contrast 
to  quantitative  designs,  our  results  suggest an opportunity 
for  qualitative  capture  and  reflection  to  help  support  the 
diversity of goals that people bring to food journaling. 

RELATED WORK 
We  review  six  areas  of  related  work:  benefits,  traditional 
methods,  challenges,  automation,  photos  and  alternative 
representations, and alternative views on food journals. 

Benefits of Food Journaling 
Food  journaling  can  provide  benefit  across  many  areas  of 
health.  Hollis  et  al.  found  weight-loss  patients  who  kept 
regular food journals lost twice as much weight as patients 
who kept no records [16]. Reflective analysis of daily food 
intake  and  symptom  progression  is  critical  in  diabetes 
management,  thus  motivating  food  journals  and  more 
comprehensive health monitoring systems that help scaffold 
understanding  and  interpreting  collected  data  [21,22]. 
Similarly,  food  journals  and  elimination  diets  are  critical 
tools  in  identifying  and  managing  food  allergies  [15,30]. 
In addition  to  creating  a  record,  journaling  can  encourage 
healthier  choices  by  increasing  in-the-moment  awareness. 
Prior studies have found increased mindfulness encouraged 
journalers to avoid consuming unhealthy foods [17,36]. 

Traditional Food Journaling Methods 
Early  methods  used  lengthy  interviews  and  questionnaires 
to  understand  patient  eating  habits  [24].  Recall  and  paper 
diaries  remain  popular  in  the  medical  community  [7],  but 
mobile  devices  have  become  powerful  journaling  tools. 
Early  research  proposed  using  mobile  devices  to  provide 
real-time  feedback  on  daily  calorie  budgets  [33].  Outside 
the medical community, many common commercial phone 
applications  now  support  using  food  databases  to  journal 
calories and other nutritional information relative to a daily 
budget  (e.g.,  MyFitnessPal,  Lose  It!).  A  person  journals 
food  by  searching  for  each  component  of  a  meal  in  the 
database  and  then  entering  portion  information.  Many 
applications also allow storing custom recipes, shortcuts for 
commonly  eaten  foods,  or  using  barcode  scanners  to 
quickly  enter  packaged  foods.  Others  strive  to  simplify 
journaling using a point system (e.g., Weight Watchers).  

Challenges of Food Journaling 
The high level of engagement required for food journaling 
can quickly lead to fatigue and reduced compliance [4,12]. 
Choe et al.  found  self-trackers  across  a  variety  of  domains 
encounter key difficulties in tracking too much information 
or information that is irrelevant to their goals, contributing 
to fatigue and abandonment [10]. In research reviewed later 
in this paper, Cordeiro et al. examine barriers and negative 
nudges  in  current  food  journals  [11].  Another  important 
problem is data hoarding, the practice of completing many 
delayed  entries  at  once  [31].  Our  interest  in  photo-based 
journals  is partially  motivated  by  a desire  to  examine  how 
photo-based  capture  might  reduce  fatigue,  but  also  that 
temptation to hoard might be reduced because a person can 
only take a photo of food before or during its consumption. 

An  additional  food  journaling  challenge  is  the  accuracy  of 
journaled  nutrition  information.  Journaled  calories  can  be 
inaccurate by 20% to 50% [19,20], due to difficulty finding 
appropriate  entries  in  food  databases,  unreliable  entries  in 
those  databases,  and  difficulty  estimating  portions  [11,35]. 
Inaccurate  estimates  are  problematic  for  people  relying  on 
them to make decisions relative to a daily budget, especially 
when combined with errors in estimating calorie expenditure. 
This plays a role in a popular backlash against gaining weight 
while following the guidance of popular fitness devices [34].  

Automating Food Journals 
Researchers  have  investigated  automating  food  journaling 
by  detecting  chewing  sounds  [1,29]  or  scanning  grocery 
receipts [23]. Others have proposed automatically capturing 
meal  photos  using  wearable  devices,  such  as  SenseCams 
[3,32].  In  addition  to  automatic  image  capture,  there  have 
been several attempts to automate nutrition entry, including 
crowdsourcing  nutrient  estimates  [27]  and  using  computer 
vision to recognize foods [18,38]. But visually similar foods 
can have vastly different nutritional profiles (e.g., due to the 
presence of condiments not visible in a photo, according to 
whether the food is homemade or processed). As previously 
noted, full automation may also undermine the mindfulness 
benefits  of  food 
journaling  [36].  We  designed  our 
photo-based journal to lower the burden of journaling while 
still requiring active involvement in data capture. 

Photos and Alternative Representations in Food Journals 
Prior work has proposed food photos to simplify journaling. 
Photos  can  be  used  for  estimating  nutrient  content  and 
portion sizes [6,26] or directly for reflection [5,13]. Zepeda 
and  Deal  compare  food  journaling  with  paper  versus  a 
camera,  finding  in-the-moment  photos  increase  awareness 
of unhealthy eating [37]. Frost and Smith develop a system 
to support diabetes patients in taking and viewing photos in 
conjunction  with  visualizations  of  blood  glucose  levels, 
including  but  not  limited  to  food  photos  [13].  They  report 
some participants observed trends between foods consumed 
and  blood  glucose.  Research  has  also  explored  other 
representations for food journals, often intended to simplify 
capture. Andrew et al.’s POND journaled according to food 
components  (e.g.,  grains,  vegetables,  sodium,  solid  fats, 

Understanding Health through Online BehaviorCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea3208 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for 

added sugar) and allowed circumventing database search by 
directly journaling components [2]. Mattila  et al. present a 
multi-dimensional wellness diary that emphasized minimal 
entry  designed 
finding 
long-term 
sustained  usage  they  argue  contrasts  with  what  could  be 
expected of more burdensome journals [25]. We build upon 
these  prior  results  to  examine  direct  use  of  photos  for 
lightweight capture and reflection in support of a variety of 
food-related  goals,  focusing  on  contrasts  to  challenges 
reported by participants with prior journaling methods. 

self-tracking, 

Alternative Views on Journaling 
Many food journals are designed with a focus on persuasion 
and  behavior  change,  but  research  has  critiqued  this  as  a 
limiting  view.  Purpura  et  al.  present  Fit4Life,  a  fictional 
persuasive  system  promoting  healthy  behavior  and  ideal 
weight, then use it to discuss issues of control and coercion 
in self-tracking [28]. Baumer et al. similarly argue a focus 
on prescriptive persuasion is limiting, then create VERA to 
explore  open-ended  social  awareness  as  an  alternative 
approach  [5].  More  focused  on  food,  Grimes  and  Harper 
critique what they term “corrective technology” and suggest 
“celebratory technology” as an alternative, noting that food 
journaling  can  be  used  as  a  reflective  task  to  capture 
positive  aspects  related  to  food,  such  as  time  spent  with 
family  and  friends,  moments  of  creativity,  and  meaningful 
exchanges [14]. We build on these perspectives of personal 
empowerment, in that our focus on qualitative capture and 
reflection  in  a  photo-based  journal  allows  people  to 
interpret their journal according to their personal goals. 

FOOD JOURNALING SURVEY 
We  conducted  a  survey  of  257  people  (162  female)  of 
which  141  had  current  or  past  food  journaling  experience. 
Respondents  were  recruited  from  university  and  local 
mailing lists, Facebook groups, and Fitbit and MyFitnessPal 
forums.  The  median  age  was  30  years  (range:  19  to  70). 
The  majority  of  respondents  (64%)  had  Body  Mass  Index 
(BMI)  scores  within  the  normal  range,  with  10  people 
opting  out  of  providing  height  and  weight  information. 
Table 1 shows additional survey participant demographics. 

All survey respondents were first asked “What does healthy 
eating look like to you?” They were then asked to rate the 
healthiness of 9 foods on a scale of 1 (Very Unhealthy) to 7 
(Very  Healthy),  using  food  images  or  the  corresponding 
nutrition labels. The images and nutrition labels represented 
the same foods but were presented in a random order. The 
foods correspond to a range of nutritional profiles, selected 
to  fall  into  four  groups:  (1)  foods  that  look  healthy  in  a 
photo,  but  unhealthy  on  a  nutritional  label  (avocado, 
salmon,  mixed  nuts),  (2)  foods  that  look  unhealthy  in  a 
photo, but look healthy on a nutritional label (waffles, mac 
and  cheese),  (3)  foods  that  look  healthy  on  both  (apple, 
cucumber),  and  (4)  foods  that  look  unhealthy  on  both 
(burger, cake). The nutrition labels presented the nutritional 
information  for  a  single  serving.  Figure  3  shows  a  sample 
food  photo  and  corresponding  nutritional  label.  We  note 
that  food  is  complex,  and  the  medical  community  has  no 

Gender 
Age 
BMI 
Length 
Journaling 
Benefits of 
Journaling 

Methods of 
Journaling 

Accuracy of 
Journal 
(Remember 
to log…) 

When Meals 
are Logged 

Method of 
Calorie 
Journaling 

Past Journalers 

Current Journalers 

36 Female, 11 Male 

69 Female, 25 Male 
M: 34, SD: 9.5, Min/Max: 21/70  M: 34, SD: 11.7, Min/Max: 19/64 
M: 25, SD: 4.6, Min/Max: 17/43  M: 28, SD: 7, Min/Max: 19/53 
Median: 2-3 months, 
Min/Max: 1 week / 2+ years 
I feel better about myself (17), it 
helps me lose weight (35), it 
makes me think about my eating 
decisions (75), it helps me find 
patterns (42), it helps me have a 
record (44) 
Paper (45), MyFitnessPal (18), 
Weight Watchers (13), Other 
Mobile (22), Desktop / Website 
(19), Fitbit (2), Other(18) 
all of their food (30), most of their 
food (45), 75% of their food (14), 
50% of their food (3), mostly 
forgot (1) 

Median: 7-12 months, 
Min/Max: 1 week / 2+ years 
I feel better about myself (14), it 
helps me lose weight (34), it 
makes me think about my eating 
decisions (40), it helps me find 
patterns (23), it helps me have a 
record (22) 
Paper (2), MyFitnessPal (25), 
Weight Watchers (3), Other 
Mobile (7), Desktop / Website (4), 
Fitbit (7), Other (2) 
all of their food (20), most of their 
food (16), 75% of their food (8), 
50% of their food (1), 25% of their 
food (1), mostly forgot (1) 

after eating (48), end of the day 
(19), when remember (8), before 
eating (4), other (6) 
64 used calorie journaling: 37 used 
databases, 31 used the internet, 25 
used nutrition labels, 18 estimated 
on their own, 8 used a book or 
other resource 

after eating (21), when remember 
(6), before eating (12), other (4) 

40 used calorie journaling: 28 use 
databases, 19 use the internet, 23 
use nutrition labels, 2 estimate on 
their own, 3 use a book or other 
resource 

Table  1.  We  surveyed  current  and  past  journalers  to 
examine their perspectives on healthy eating and their 
experiences with current food journaling methods. 

single  objective  measure  for  rating  food  healthiness  [9]. 
This survey targets respondent perceptions of healthiness. 

Past and current journalers were further asked to respond to 
questions  about  their  goals  for  food  journaling,  their 
journaling  methods,  the  benefits  received  from  journaling, 
as  well  as  experiences  and  difficulties  in  journaling. 
Respondents  who  no  longer  journaled  were  additionally 
asked  questions  targeting  their  reasons  for  stopping.  We 
used  open  coding  techniques  on  open-ended  questions  to 
extract themes and gain an understanding of trends. 

SURVEY RESULTS 
We present survey results in four sections: healthy eating as 
defined by respondents, food journaling barriers, when and 
why  past 
journaling,  and  comparing 
healthiness  ratings  between  photos  and  nutrition  labels. 
Additional analysis of responses regarding current and past 
food journaling practices is available in [11], with this paper 
focusing on their relevance to photo-based food journaling. 

journalers  stop 

What Does Healthy Eating Look Like 
Responses to “What does healthy eating look like to you?” 
identified a variety of perspectives, summarized in Figure 2. 
Responses 
themes: 
eating more  vegetables  (77%),  more  fruit  (53%),  or  more 
protein  (33%),  maintaining  a  balanced  diet  (29%),  and 
avoiding processed foods (29%).  

include  consensus  around  several 

In  contrast,  we  note  only  24  (9%)  respondents  mentioned 
calories.  Calories  are  probably  the  most  pervasive  metric 
for  weight-loss  and nutrition journaling, but  reducing  food 
to  such  a  single  numeric  value  often  loses  the  dimensions 
respondents  said  were 
important  (e.g.,  eating  more 
vegetables,  eating  more  fruit,  having  a  balanced  diet, 

Understanding Health through Online BehaviorCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea3209 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
for  stopping  was  reduced  value  over  time  (37%),  either 
because a new habit was established or a goal was reached. 
Other reasons included journaling requiring too much effort 
(25%),  being  too  time  consuming  (16%),  and  a  loss  of 
motivation  (10%).  Reasons  for  stopping  were  often 
complex with many factors contributing to the decision. 

SP27  was  representative  of  encountering  multiple  barriers 
and ultimately deciding to abandon journaling: “It was too 
time  consuming  and  tedious.  I  also  did  not  know  what  to 
enter  if  I  ate  out,  so  I  often  did  not  enter  data  and  that 
compounded.  I  also  felt  embarrassed  to  do  it  in  front  of 
friends so I stopped. It seemed like more work than it was 
worth.” We further discuss these general challenges to food 
journaling in Cordeiro et al. [11], with the remainder of this 
paper focusing on our lightweight photo-based food journal. 

Comparing Food Representations 
We hypothesized food representation impacts perception of 
healthiness. We tested this by asking respondents to rate 9 
food  photos  and  their  corresponding  nutrition  labels  on  a 
scale  of  1  (Very  Unhealthy)  to  7  (Very Healthy).  We  also 
asked which representation made it easier to determine.  

When  asked  which  representation  made  it  easier  to 
determine healthiness, 46% of respondents selected photos, 
22%  selected  nutrition  labels,  and  the  remainder  had  no 
preference.  For  participants  that  preferred  photos,  many 
expressed  having  an  image  in  their  mind  of  what  healthy 
and unhealthy looked like, but knowing less about nutritional 
contents:  “I  think  I  have  roughly  accurate  pictures  in  my 
mind of what a healthy vs. not healthy food looks like, but 
I'm realizing I don't really know the nutritional makeup of 
any  of  these  things  with  any  sort  of  decent  accuracy” 
(SP190).  Many  respondents  that  preferred  photos  also 
reported advantages of photos over nutrition labels, such as 
being  able  to  determine  portion  sizes,  the  method  of 
cooking,  or  whether  food  was  processed:  “I  have  a  hard 
time  understanding  size,  and  whether  or  not  the  food  is 
heavily  processed,  which  pictures  convey”  (SP170)  and 
“photographs reveal quality” (SP179). The respondents that 
preferred nutritional labels generally worried about pictures 
hiding  condiments  and  wanted  precision  in  calorie  counts, 
two points we revisit in examining field study responses. 

To  further  examine  respondent  interpretation  of  food 
representations,  we  calculated  the  skewness  of  healthiness 
rankings  for  each  food  in  each  representation,  using  the 
adjusted  Fisher-Pearson  standardized  moment  coefficient 
with  a  0.9  cutoff.  The  skew  allowed  us  to  determine  the 
general trend in how respondents perceived the healthiness 
of each food and compare that trend across representation. 
The  results  of  these  comparisons  fell  into  three  groups, 
shown  in  Figure 3.  We  found  foods  that  (1)  had  the  same 
skew  in  both  representations  (e.g.,  hamburgers  rated 
unhealthy  in  both,  cucumbers  rated  healthy  in  both), 
(2) foods  with  skew  in  the  photo  but  no  skew  in  the  label 
(e.g., salmon rated healthy in the photo, but had no skew in 
labels), and (3) opposing skew (e.g., mixed nuts rated healthy 

Figure  2.  The  20  most  frequent  survey  responses  to 
“What does healthy eating look like to you?” Respondents 
identify  a  variety  of  themes,  in  contrast  to  a  focus  on 
calories in many current food journaling applications. 
having  a  low  processed  diet).  This  suggests  a  mismatch 
between  how  people  define  healthy  eating  versus  the 
information highlighted in many current food journals. 

Food Journaling Challenges 
The  most  cited  reason  for  not  journaling  was  forgetting, 
with  54%  of  respondents  having  missed  an  entry  for  this 
reason.  However,  forgetting  was  far  from  the  only  reason 
respondents  did  not  journal.  Even  when  they  remembered 
they should journal, 40% reported choosing not to journal a 
food  that  was  too  difficult  to  enter.  Additional  reasons  for 
not  journaling  included  not  knowing  what  was  in  a  meal 
(40%)  or  social  contexts  (20%),  such  as  not  wanting  to 
journal in front of friends. This shows that forgetting is not 
the  only  challenge  in  current  approaches  to  capture,  thus 
suggesting  opportunities  for  new  designs.  But  13%  of 
respondents  further  reported  they  intentionally  avoided 
journaling  when  they  ate  something  unhealthy  or  did  not 
want  to  record  exceeding  a  calorie  budget:  “Sometimes  I 
feel  like  not  logging  things  because  I  know  it’s  really 
unhealthy. =(” (P117). This is problematic in that deciding 
against capture undermines later reflection or analysis. 

Although respondents reported packaged food and fast food 
were  the  easiest  to  journal  with  their  prior  tools,  that 
conflicted with how they defined healthy eating (e.g., to eat 
less  processed  foods).  Most  journaling  applications  allow 
adding entries for foods not found in a database, but many 
respondents found this tedious. Some even reported avoiding 
food  that  was  hard  to  track,  instead  turning  to  packaged 
food: "They weren’t on the list. I just avoided eating things 
that  were  hard  to  log.”  (SP132).  This  exposes  a  concern 
that  journaling  can  artificially  limit  food  choices  by 
incentivizing  foods  that  are  easier  to  track,  even  though 
those foods may not support journaler goals. Cordeiro et al. 
discuss this as a negative nudge in current journals [11]. 

When and Why Did Past Journalers Stop 
Of  141  respondents  with  prior  food  journaling  experience, 
94  no  longer  kept  a  food  journal.  Their  most  common 
method  was  paper  (48%),  and  they  reported  keeping  a 
journal for a median of between 2 to 3 months. In contrast, 
current  journalers  primarily  used  technology  (98%)  and 
reported  journaling  for  a  median  of  7  to  12  months.  This 
suggests  technology-simplified  journaling  is  supporting 
longer-term  journaling.  The  most  commonly  stated  reason 

Understanding Health through Online BehaviorCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea3210 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure  3.  Respondents  rated  the  healthiness  of  the  same  foods  represented  using  Food  Photos  or  Nutrition  Labels. 
We found  a)  foods  with  agreement  in  skew  in  both  representations,  b)  foods  with  skew  in  only  the  photo 
representation, c) foods with opposing skews in the representations, and d) more extreme ratings for Food Photos. 
in  the  photo,  but  unhealthy  in  labels).  Consistent  with  our 
finding  that  calories  are  not  primary  in  how  many  define 
healthy  eating,  these  differences  in  skew  show  that 
low-level nutritional information often does not correspond 
with how people consider food healthiness. 

In  the  photo  representation,  all  foods  had  either  a  positive 
or negative skew. In contrast, only three foods had skew in 
the  nutrition  labels  representation.  Figure  3d  illustrates  the 
combined respondent ratings across all foods. Respondents 
overall ranked photos toward extremes (i.e., “very healthy” 
or  “very  unhealthy”).  Nutrition  labels  for  the  same  foods 
received  a  broader  range  of  scores.  We  tested  whether 
photos yield more extreme ratings using a chi-squared test, 
bucketing  ratings  in  (1,  2,  6,  7)  as  extreme  and  ratings  in 
(3, 4, 5)  as  neutral.  Respondents  were  significantly  more 
likely  to  give  food  an  extreme  rating  with  a  photo 
representation  than  with  a  nutritional  label  representation 
X2(1,  4626)  ≈  624,  p  <.001.  Food  photos  thus  allowed 
respondents to develop a stronger opinion of the healthiness 
of  foods,  while  nutrition  labels  left  them  unsure.  This 
supports our prior discussion of respondent statements they 
prefer  photos  because  they  understand  healthiness  but  are 
often unsure how to interpret nutritional information. 

FIELD STUDY OF A LIGHTWEIGHT FOOD JOURNAL 
Our  survey  reveals  challenges  in  food  journal  design, 
mismatches  between  journals  versus  how  people  define 
healthy  eating,  and  opportunities  for  photo-based  capture. 
Because  of  the  survey  method,  responses  were  based  in 
recollections  and  hypothetical  foods.  We  complement  this 
with  a  field  study  examining  photo-based  journaling  with 
the food that journalers encounter in their everyday lives. 

We conducted our field study by developing a food journal 
organized  around  photos  and  does  not  include  calories  or 
nutrition  information.  We  deployed  it  with  27  people  to 
examine:  (1)  the  impact  of  photo-based  capture  on  food 
journaling challenges, (2) what value photos provide absent 
nutritional  details,  and  (3)  how  journaling  challenges  and 
the value of photos vary according to journaler goals. 

Figure 4. The DECAF mobile interface, showing a blank 
journal entry (left) and a scrolling journal view (right). 

The DECAF Food Journal 
We conduct our field study using a lightweight, photo-based 
journal,  DECAF  (Diary  of  Emotion,  Context,  And  Food). 
It consists of two components: (1) a mobile application for 
easy  food  capture,  and  (2)  a  website  for  providing  details 
and  reflection.  At  the  time  of  eating,  a  journaler  simply 
opens  the  application  and  adds  an  entry  with  an  “I  Am 
Eating” button. Mobile journal entries can include a picture 
of the food, a description, and a rating of current mood (as 
seen  in  Figure  4).  The  myDECAF.org  website  allows 
providing  additional  detailed  information  about  an  entry, 
such as which meal of the day, the meal enjoyment rating, 
meal  location,  how  many  and  with  whom  it  was  eaten, 
feelings  after  eating,  and  a  description  of  the  meal 
components  (as  seen  in  Figure  1).  DECAF  explicitly  and 
intentionally does not log calories or other nutritional details, 
as our focus is on participant response to photo-based capture 
and reflection in comparison to prior journaling techniques. 

Procedure 
Participants  installed  DECAF  on  their  own  phone.  We 
encouraged  them  to  use  the  application  for  in-the-moment 
journaling  and  to  then  visit  the  website  nightly  to  provide 
additional  details.  Participants  were  compensated  $20  for 

Understanding Health through Online BehaviorCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea3211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
every  week  they  journaled  their  food  and  provided  details 
on the website. The study consisted of a one-hour pre-study 
session,  use  of  the  journal  for  four  weeks,  and  a  one-hour 
post-study  session.  Some  participants  who  kept  thorough 
journals were given the option to continue for up to 4 more 
weeks, with an additional one-hour interview. 

In the initial session, we interviewed participants about their 
health goals, past journaling experiences, and eating routines. 
In  the  post-study  session,  we  asked  multiple  choice  and 
Likert scale questions and then a semi-structured interview. 
The  interview  began  by  asking  participants  to  reflect  on 
their four weeks of DECAF usage. We finished with a series 
of  questions  about  advantages,  disadvantages,  difficulties, 
and  valuable  aspects  of  any  prior  journaling  methods  as 
well  as  those  for  photo-based  journaling  with  DECAF. 
We transcribed  the  semi-structured  interviews  and  used 
open coding techniques to extract themes. 

Participants 
We  recruited  27  participants  to  use  DECAF  for  between 
4 and  8  weeks  (not  including  3  drop  outs).  Participants 
ranged in age from 21 to 64 years (M: 39, SD: 13) and had 
a range of health goals and journaling experience. Although 
all field participants indicated a general goal of wanting to 
make  healthier  food  choices,  their  specific  goals  ranged 
from substantial weight loss to transitioning their diet to be 
vegan or vegetarian. Participants were in two trials: 

Trial 1 consisted of 14 participants (after 2 drop outs) from 
the Seattle area. Participants were recruited from university 
and local mailing lists based on interest in food journaling. 
This trial included several people on vegetarian, vegan, and 
low-processed  food  diets.  10  people  had  previous  food 
journaling experience. This trial ran November to January. 

Trial  2  consisted  of  13  participants  (after  1  drop  out) 
recruited from the University of Rochester Medical Center 
using ResearchMatch. All had a BMI >= 25, indicating they 
were overweight or obese. As in Trial 1, we recruited based 
on  interest  in  food  journaling,  and  10  had  previous 
experience. This trial ran January to February.  

FIELD STUDY RESULTS 
We present our field deployment results in terms of usage, 
the  impact  of  lightweight  journaling  on  challenges,  the 
value of photos, and differences by journaler food goal. 

Usage  
Common challenges with long-term food journaling include 
compliance  and  data  hoarding.  Estimating  compliance  is 
difficult  as  there  is  no  ground  truth  as  to  what  food  was 
consumed.  To  approximate  compliance,  we  examine  the 
journaling rate. Participants journaled for an average of 5.2 
weeks, a total of 3569 entries, an average of 3.5 entries per 
participant per day. This suggests overall high usage. 

We  expected  in-the-moment  photo-based  journaling  to 
minimize hoarding, as a photo can only be taken before or 
during  food  consumption.  To  detect  hoarding,  we  logged 
the eating time and the journaling time, then compared the 

timestamps.  We  defaulted  the  eating  time  to  “Now”  and 
asked  participants  to  change  it  to  match  when  they  ate. 
Participants generally journaled within 10 minutes of eating 
(86% of all entries). Because 94% of entries created within 
10  minutes  of  eating  contained  photos  of  the  food,  they 
were not susceptible to hoarding. In contrast, a journal entry 
created more than 30 minutes after eating normally did not 
contain a photo (12% of all entries were created more than 
30 minutes after eating, only 20% of which include a photo). 
When  delayed  entries  did  contain  a  photo,  it  was  often  of 
dirty  plates  or  empty  wrappers.  Although  such  photos 
would  be  difficult  or  impossible  for  transcription  by  an 
automated system or by other people, participants reported 
they supported their ability to remember what they ate. 

Impact of Lightweight Journaling on Challenges 
Similar to our survey findings, all field participants with prior 
food  journaling  experience  reported  their  prior  techniques 
made  packaged  food  and  fast  food  easiest  to  log,  with 
home-cooked  meals  being  more  challenging.  In  contrast, 
photo journals lowered this barrier and leveled the playing 
field among meal types. Taking a picture is equally difficult 
regardless  of  preparation,  and  participants  rated  all  food 
types at the same difficulty. 60% of field participants with 
prior journaling experience reported they sometimes did not 
journal a meal with their prior technique because it was too 
difficult.  With  photo-based  journaling  in  DECAF,  only 
22%  reported  not  journaling  because  it  was  too  difficult. 
Participants still reported difficulty when food is eaten over 
time  (e.g.,  appetizer,  main  dish,  dessert)  or  in  a  sampling 
manner (e.g., a buffet, at a party). These types of meals require 
several entries throughout dining, increasing burden and the 
likelihood of forgetting or choosing to not journal [11]. 

With many journaling methods, it is difficult to log a meal 
if a journaler does not know the exact ingredients. 65% of 
field  participants  with  prior  experience  reported  not 
journaling  with  their  prior  technique  because  they  did  not 
know the ingredients. Knowing meal composition does not 
impact  the  ability  to  journal a  meal  with  photos,  and  none 
of our participants reported not journaling for this reason. 

There  are  also  often  social  challenges  surrounding  food 
journaling.  55%  of  field  study  participants  with  prior 
journaling  experience  reported  this  was  a  challenge  with 
their  prior  technique.  Although  publicly  taking  photos  of 
food  with  phones  has  become  more  accepted,  participants 
reported  similar  challenges  with  photo  journals.  52% 
reported  feeling  awkward  photographing  food  in  front  of 
others.  The  types  of  meals  reported  as  most  socially 
awkward  to  photograph  were  restaurant  meals,  dinner  at  a 
friend’s house, and food at a party. We note these are also 
contexts  in which  food often  comes  over  time,  and  so  this 
challenge may interact with the above challenge. 

Finally, although participants reported photo-based capture 
reduced  barriers  to  journaling,  simply  forgetting  to  journal 
remains  a  challenge.  95%  of  participants  with  prior 
experience  reported  forgetting  to  journal  with  their  prior 

Understanding Health through Online BehaviorCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea3212 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
technique,  and  93%  of  participants  reported  sometimes 
forgetting with DECAF. Because there is no ground truth in 
either  case,  we  cannot  determine  if  reducing  barriers  with 
photo-based  capture  impacts  the  frequency  of  forgetting. 
But this clearly remains a challenge for food journal design. 

Value of Photos 
Photos provide rapid capture, but people also need to obtain 
value  from  the  data  they  capture.  DECAF  explicitly  and 
intentionally  does  not  log  calories  or  other  nutritional 
details, as we explore the value people obtain directly from 
the photos themselves. Of the 3569 entries journaled in the 
deployment, 3136 (88%) included photos. Many said photos 
were  the  most  salient  feature:  “the  strength  was  obviously 
the  photos”  (FP34),  “I think  the  pictures  were  great.  With 
pictures  you,  even  if  there  are  no  words  there,  you 
understand  a  lot”  (FP11).  During  the  final  interview,  we 
asked  participants  to  talk  aloud  as  they  reflected  on  the 
most recent weeks of their journal. Many described looking 
only  at  photos,  ignoring  other  information  they  collected: 
“I'm  totally  just  looking  at  the  picture”  (FP4),  “I’m  just 
looking at the picture, that’s the interesting thing” (FP11). 

Who, What, Where, How 
Photos were not merely “the interesting thing”, as interview 
participants  reported  that  photo  context  supported  much 
richer recall (e.g., where a meal was eaten, what other tasks 
had  been  accomplished  that day,  who  was  eaten  with,  and 
the preparation and makeup of the food). FP9 stated “I can 
know  what  I  ate,  what  I  typically  eat,  I can  remember  the 
events, I  can understand  myself  better”.  Photo background 
often contained enough detail that participants knew where 
they had eaten (as in Figure 5c): “[mom] actually has nice 
tablecloths and really nice plates, so I know it's her house” 
(FP11), “you can see my counter” (FP3). Participants also 
reported  purposely  including  context  so  they  could  later 
know  where  they  had  eaten  (e.g., FP4  included  her  laptop 
when eating at work). 

Some  participants  expressed  an  emotional  connection  to 
photos that captured happy times they had with friends and 
family:  “Having  the  picture  reminded  me  of  how  I  was 
feeling  that  day,  and  the  context  around  it”  (FP10).  Some 
also  reported  purposely  including  people  in  photos  so  that 
they  could  better  remember  those  times  (as in  Figure 5a). 
FP11  said  “I  purposely  got  my  boyfriend's  hand  [in  the 
photo], because I wanted to remember that he was there”. 

Survey  respondents  had  expressed  concern  that  nutritional 
labels often do not provide the preparation of food, such as 
what oils were used or the level of processing. Conversely, 
some  had  expressed  concerns  that  photos  might  hide 
condiments or other high-calorie portions of a meal. In our 
field study,  we found participants could use their photos in 
seeing or remembering these details of food they had eaten. 
FP13 was on a low-processed diet, and described being able 
to tell if her food met her goal by quickly scanning photos 
for wrappers: “From my pictures it's pretty obvious to me if 
it  was  prepackaged  or  not.”  Similarly,  some  participants 

Figure  5.  Participant  photos  supported  rich  recall, 
including  a) with  whom  food  was  eaten,  b) details  of 
food that was eaten, c) context of where food was eaten. 

reported  scanning  photos  for  color  as  an  indication  of  the 
presence  of  more  vegetables.  Several  said  photos  helped 
with determining portion sizes: “It gave you an idea of what 
your portions are […]  ‘Wow, I ate way too much pasta in 
that  bowl.’”  (FP24).  Finally,  participants  reported  using 
cues  in  the photos  to remember  food  that was not  actually 
in the photo: “an empty muesli bowl looks different than an 
empty  salad  bowl,  because  my  salad  dressing  always  has 
balsamic vinegar in it, so it’s kinda brown, whereas muesli 
is  kinda  white”  (FP5).  Overall,  participants  reported  they 
could  flexibly  interpret  photos  during  reflection,  including 
remembering  context  that  would  be  difficult  or  impossible 
to recover with an automated system or by another person. 

Triggers and Trends 
Participants  were  able  to  use  photos  in  making  deeper 
connections  that  attributed  cause  to  context.  They  often 
identified the places they were at and the people they were 
with  as  influences  in  why  they  made  certain  food  choices: 
“[the photos] reminded me of what I ate and what was the 
situation” (FP6), “I know I ate all of these cookies because 
my friend came to visit” (FP11). Participants were also able 
to use photos in picking out higher-level trends confirming 
beliefs  they  had  about  themselves:  “I  eat  too  much  pizza” 
(FP10),  “I  have  salad  for  lunch  every  single  day”  (FP5), 
“For breakfast,  I  eat  lots of  the  same  things”  (FP4). They 
also  identified  previously  unrecognized  patterns:  “I  don’t 
branch  out  as  much  as  I  thought  I  did,  even  when  I  go 
somewhere new, I kind of get what I always get somewhere 
else” (FP10), “I eat a lot of the same thing, and I eat kind 
of  boring”  (FP19),  “I’m  surprised  at  how  many  times  I’m 
seeing  things  that  I  consider  an  exception  to  my  diet!” 
(FP4),  “I  didn't  eat  as  many  fruits  and  vegetables  as  I 
thought”  (FP16).  Identifying  triggers  and  trends  can be  an 
important use of  a food journal in  improving  eating habits 
and identifying new goals. Participants used photos for this, 
but more explicit support could add lightweight tagging in 
support  of  more  active  sorting  and  filtering  mechanisms, 
without imposing calories or nutritional details. 

Awareness and Mindfulness 
Wilde and Garvin define increased awareness of behavior as 
one of two complementary components in self-tracking [36]. 
Photo-based  captured  encouraged  participants  to  journal  at 

Understanding Health through Online BehaviorCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea3213 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
reported 

the moment of eating, which they found helped them think 
about  their  food  choices:  “The  simple  action  of  logging 
makes  me  think  about  what  I  eat  and  how  much  of  it” 
(FP6).  Participants 
taking  photos  created 
additional mindfulness because they did not want unhealthy 
food  to  appear  in  their  journal:  “The  fact  that  there  would 
be a picture made me have healthier snacks” (FP19), “Do I 
really  want  to  eat  this?  I’m  capturing  this  image”  (FP17), 
“I didn’t  want  to  take  a  picture  of  chips,  or  a  bunch  of 
really bad food, so I guess that kinda helped me make more 
healthy food choices, just the act of taking a picture” (FP2), 
“when  I  had  to  take  a  picture  of  it,  I  was  more  worried 
about  what  was  in  the  picture,  that  there  should  be  some 
fruits  and  vegetables”  (FP16).  Such  reactions  suggest 
calorie  budgets  or  detailed  nutritional  information  are  not 
necessarily  required  for healthier  in-the-moment  decisions. 
If people already know what is healthy, the mindfulness of 
journaling can itself encourage healthier choices. 

Differences by Goal 
Our field study included two separate trials with participants 
with  varying  goals.  Trial  1  contained  participants  with  a 
general interest in food journaling, while Trial 2 contained 
only participants that were overweight or obese and trying 
to lose weight. Because our system did not contain calories 
or  other  nutrition  details,  we  expected  different  reactions 
from participants according to their health goals. Although 
most  participants  across  both  trials  saw  value  in  photos as 
part  of  a  food  journal,  we  found  differences  in  how  the 
photos  were  used  and  the  benefits  they  provided.  Trial  1 
participants  generally  found  the  lack  of  calories  to  be  a 
strength,  while  most  Trial  2  participants  felt  they  needed 
calorie  information  to  reach  their  weight  goal:  “I need  to 
know  calories”  (FP24),  “calories  and  nutrients,  the  things 
in  the  food  really  matter  to  me  the  most”  (FP19),  “I think 
someone starting out really needs [calories]” (FP20).  

After using photo-based journaling, some Trial 2 participants 
changed  their  view,  seeing  additional  value:  “I  think  you 
can  tell  a  lot  from  the  pictures.  You  might  not  have  your 
calorie  count.  But,  am  I  eating  something  too  fattening? 
Is my portion too large?” (FP28). When reflecting on their 
diary at the end of the study, several had strong reactions to 
actually seeing the photos of what they were eating: “When 
I would get on the computer, I would look at the diary and 
realize  that  I  was  on  a  really  bad  road.  I  realized  what  I 
was  eating  for  the  last  month.  It  was  awful!”  (FP24)  and 
“The history was kind of a wake up call for me” (FP25). 

Several Trial 2 participants liked photos in conjunction with 
calorie  information:  “I  would  LOVE  if  I  could  see  the 
picture  on  MyFitnessPal”  (FP26).  Many  also  decided  to 
additionally  track  calories  using  other  methods,  using 
photos  as  a  quick  way  to  capture  the  foods  consumed  for 
later  lookup:  “easier  to  figure  out  what  the  calories  are 
from  the  pictures”  (FP22)  and  “For  some  meals,  it’s  just 
really  easy  to  take  a  picture….  Rather  than  sit  there  and 
type in every ingredient” (FP20). We have noted prior work 

uses  photos  as  an  intermediate  capture  to  support  later 
calorie entry, and our results support such a usage. But our 
broader  results  also  show  this  should  not  be  required  nor 
assumed as the primary usage, and journals should instead 
support a variety of goals enabled by photo-based capture. 

DISCUSSION 
We found that photo-based capture and reflection can directly 
support a variety of food journaling practices in support of 
diverse  goals.  We  now  discuss  our  results  relative  to 
challenges participants reported with their prior techniques. 

Journaling Without Judgment 
13%  of  survey  participants  and  45%  of  field  participants 
reported that in their prior journaling they sometimes chose 
not to journal because food exceeded their calorie budget or 
because  the  food  was  unhealthy.  In  contrast,  none  of  our 
field  participants  reported  avoiding  journaling  an  entry for 
this reason. Photo-based journaling supported capture while 
avoiding  creating  feelings  of  failure  and 
judgment: 
“[DECAF  was]  easier  because  there  were  no  calorie 
counts,  no  judgments,  but  still  makes  you  aware”  (FP14). 
Such  reactions  suggest  a  potential  for  some  separation 
between  in-the-moment  capture  and  more  goal-oriented 
reflection. We have noted the act of journaling itself creates 
mindfulness, but that “bad” moments can create a sense of 
judgment  that  undermines  capture  and  therefore  later 
reflection. This is especially damaging if failing to capture 
those  “bad”  moments  prevents  a  journaler  from  correctly 
diagnosing  a  trigger,  identifying  a  trend,  or  achieving  a 
goal.  A  design  opportunity  exists  for  considering  how  to 
support  capture  of  “bad”  moments  while  promoting 
outside-of-the-moment reflection in the context of goals. 

Role of Personalization 
Field  participants  wanted  to  track  aspects  of  their diet  that 
were  not  supported  by  DECAF  or  other  existing  journals. 
These include whether a food was organic or grass-fed, the 
level  of  processing  of  a  food,  and  the  oils  used  when 
cooking.  37%  of  our  survey  participants  with  prior 
journaling experience reported they stopped journaling due 
to reduced value over time, so providing mechanisms to set 
and  track  varied  personal  goals  could  help  journalers  stay 
motivated. People change their goals over time, and there is 
an opportunity for systems that allow people to change the 
goals  of  their  journaling.  For  example,  many  participants 
mentioned trying to lose weight and then keep it off while 
eating  more  nutritiously.  These  are  two  distinct  goals,  and 
the support a system should provide when a person is trying 
to  lose  weight  may  be  different  than  when  trying  to 
maintain  weight  and  eat  nutritiously.  Journals  should  be 
configurable to support evolving personal goals. 

Active Reminders 
The  top  reported  reason  for  not  journaling  food  in  our 
survey  was  simply  forgetting.  Although  using  photos  as  a 
capture mechanism lowered the journaling barrier, our field 
participants also struggled with remembering to log. Future 
systems  could  combine  lightweight  capture  methods  with 

Understanding Health through Online BehaviorCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea3214 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
automatic  reminders  to  log.  For  example,  research  is 
examining  detection  of  visual  or  audio  characteristics  that 
correspond to eating [1,3,29,32]. Another possibility would 
be using journal history to identify routines that can prompt 
reminders at likely eating times. In contrast to proposals for 
automated journaling, a combination of lightweight capture 
and  active  reminders  could  keep  journalers  involved  in 
capture,  thus  providing  the  benefits  of  mindfulness  while 
reducing the burden of remembering to journal. 

Journaling During Transitions 
Long-term  compliance  is  often  a  goal  in  self-tracking,  but 
our results suggest targeted journaling at critical times may 
provide benefits without requiring long-term adoption. We 
administered  the  study over a  time  containing food-related 
holidays  (American  Thanksgiving,  Hanukkah,  Christmas) 
as  well  as  New  Years  Day  (when  many  set  health  goals). 
For  our  student  participants,  the  study  also  spanned  the 
university  transitions  of  finals  week,  winter  break,  and  a 
new  quarter.  A  trend  in  our  interviews  was  a  persistent 
optimism that, although their eating was not currently ideal, 
in  the  future  it  would  be  easier:  “I  want  to  go  back  to  the 
normal. The past month is a lot different and a lot of times I 
couldn't  really  have  the  food  I  wanted  to  eat.”  (FP9). 
Although  optimism  can  be  good,  it  can  also  encourage 
people to postpone changing behaviors because they hope it 
will  be  easier  if  they  just  wait  a  bit  longer.  Targeting 
journaling  during  times  of  transition  may  help  people 
navigate  these  times  with  a  higher  level  of  awareness  and 
help  them  implement  habits  in  their  new  environment  that 
can persist after journaling has ended.  

Robustness to Missing Data 
Survey  respondents  and  field  study  participants  reported 
many reasons for not logging a meal with prior techniques 
(e.g.,  forgetting,  it  being  too  difficult,  not  knowing  the 
ingredients). Missed entries are particularly problematic for 
calorie-based  food  journals,  as  the  primary  feedback  is 
quantitative  (e.g.,  a  sum  relative  to  a  budget,  an  average 
over the past week). Missed entries make this inaccurate, so 
one  missed  entry  can  derail  an  entire  day  or  more  of 
journaling:  “it  showed  the  amount  of  calories  you  took  in 
that week but if you didn’t fill out most of the week it was 
sort of useless. So then I started with a lot of effort but as it 
started to go down, it sort of snow balled from there” (FP2). 
As  reported  by  Cordeiro  et  al.  [11],  participants  reported 
that  with  prior  techniques  they  often  would  not  bother 
journaling after missing a single meal in a day, sometimes 
leading them to abandon journaling: “Too hard to remember 
to do it after every meal. Then I got discouraged once I got 
behind and was never able to catch up again.” (SP81). 

that 

reported 

In  contrast,  participants 
to 
photograph a meal did not devalue journaling other meals, 
as each represented a self-contained data point. By focusing 
on a data presentation that does not require long periods of 
perfect  compliance,  missing  a  meal  did  not  initiate  longer 
periods of non-journaling. This suggests robustness toward 

forgetting 

missing  data  should  be  considered  in  the  design  of  food 
journals.  Even  if  photos  are  not  a  primary  format, 
alternative  presentations  could  better  preserve  value  and 
motivation for journaling in the face of missing data.  

Interpretability of Data Representation 
Prior work finds calorie journals are inaccurate by as much 
as 20% to 50% [19,20], and 46% of our survey respondents 
preferred  food  represented  as  photos  over  nutrition  labels. 
Even  respondents  with  prior  food  journaling  experience 
expressed difficulty interpreting nutrition labels without the 
context  of  the  foods.  Although  that  context  is  available 
during  capture  of  the  food  a  person  eats,  many  journals 
remove the context in daily or weekly summaries that focus 
on  a  summary  of  calories  or  other  nutritional  details.  The 
result is often a journal that is both inaccurate and difficult 
to interpret in the context of a person’s goals. 

In  contrast  to  measurement,  photos  emphasizes  capture. 
Field study participants reported diverse value in photos as 
their  primary  data  representation.  Although  some  with 
specific weight-related goals also wanted calories, most felt 
photos provided information about what was eaten, how the 
food  was  cooked,  with  whom  food  was  eaten,  and  the 
context  surrounding  the  meal.  Participants  were  able  to 
interpret  their  journals  to  quickly  determine  whether  they 
thought  it  was  a  healthy  or  unhealthy  week,  a  personal 
judgment  that  can  be  difficult  with  nutritional  summaries. 
Participants  were  also  able  to  identify  trends  and  triggers 
that  would  have  been  masked  in  a  nutritional  summary. 
Photo-based representation is thus familiar and interpretable, 
allowing  journalers  to  leverage  existing  food  knowledge. 
Although  there  are  important  questions  about  how  to  help 
people  improve  food  knowledge,  our  results  show  an 
opportunity  for  designs  to  exploit  existing  knowledge  in 
support of diverse food-related goals. 

CONCLUSION 
People bring a variety of goals  to food journaling, and they 
report  prior  techniques  fail  to  support  or  even  undermine 
their  self-tracking.  Our  work  has  examined  direct  use  of 
photos  in  a  food  journal  to  support  capture  and  reflection. 
We  deployed  a  lightweight  photo-based  food  journal  with 
27 participants for between 4 to 8 weeks. Participants report 
photos ease capture, present information that is important to 
them  (e.g.  food  variety,  level  of  processing,  vegetables), 
and  support  reflection  to  identify  triggers  and  trends.  Our 
work  thus  provides  support  for  photo-based  journaling  to 
augment or sometimes replace  methods focused  on  calories 
or  other  nutritional  details.  Photos  can  support  journaling 
relevant to a variety of food-related goals, while also removing 
or reducing barriers associated with common methods. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We thank Daniel Epstein, Julie Kientz, and Sean Munson for 
their  feedback.  This  work  was  funded  in  part  by  the  Intel 
Science  and  Technology  Center  for  Pervasive  Computing 
and  by  the  National  Science  Foundation  under  awards 
OAI-1028195 and SCH-1344613. 

Understanding Health through Online BehaviorCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea3215 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
1. Amft, O., Stäger, M., Lukowicz, P., and Tröster, G. Analysis of 

Chewing Sounds for Dietary Monitoring. UbiComp 2005, 56-72. 

2. Andrew, A.H., Borriello, G., and Fogarty, J. Simplifying

Mobile Phone Food Diaries: Design and Evaluation of a Food
Index-Based Nutrition Diary. PervasiveHealth 2013, 260-263. 
3. Arab, L., Estrin, D., Kim, D.H., Burke, J., and Goldman, J. (2011). 
Feasibility Testing of an Automated Image-Capture Method
to Aid Dietary Recall. Eur J Clin Nutr, 65(10), 1156-1162.
4. Barrett-Connor, E. (1991). Nutrition Epidemiology: How Do We 
Know What They Ate? Am J Clin Nutr, 54(1 Suppl), 182S-187S. 

5. Baumer, E.P.S., Katz, S.J., Freeman, J.E., Adams, P.,

Gonzales, A.L., Pollak, J., Retelny, D., Niederdeppe, J.,
Olson, C.M., and Gay, G.K. Prescriptive Persuasion and
Open-Ended Social Awareness. CSCW 2012, 475-484.
6. Bird, G. and Elwood, P.C. (1983). The Dietary Intakes of
Subjects Estimated from Photographs Compared with a
Weighed Record. Hum Nutr Appl Nutr, 37(6), 470-473.

7. Burke, B.S. (1947). The Dietary History as a Tool in
Research. J Am Diet Assoc, 23(12), 1041-1046.
8. Burke, L.E., Wang, J., and Sevick, M.A. (2011).

Self-Monitoring in Weight Loss: A Systematic Review
of the Literature. J Am Diet Assoc, 111(1), 92-102.
9. Chahoud, G., Aude, Y.W., and Mehta, J.L. (2004).
Dietary Recommendations in the Prevention and
Treatment of Coronary Heart Disease: Do We Have
the Ideal Diet Yet? Am J Cardiol, 94(10), 1260-1267.
10. Choe, E.K., Lee, N.B., Lee, B., Pratt, W., and Kientz, J.A.
Understanding Quantified-Selfers’ Practices in Collecting
and Exploring Personal Data. CHI 2014, 1143-1152.
11. Cordeiro, F., Epstein, D.,Thomaz, E., Bales, E., Jagannathan, 
A.K., Abowd, G., and Fogarty, J. Barriers and Negative Nudges: 
Exploring Challenges in Food Journaling. CHI 2015, To Appear. 

12. Craig, M.R., Kristal, A.R., Cheney, C.L., and Shattuck,

A.L. (2000). The Prevalence and Impact of ‘Atypical’ Days
in 4-Day Food Records. J Am Diet Assoc, 100(4), 421-427.

13. Frost, J. and Smith, B.K. Visualizing Health: Imagery in

Diabetes Education. DUX 2003, 1-14.

14. Grimes, A. and Harper, R. Celebratory Technology: New
Directions for Food Research in HCI. CHI 2008, 467-476.
15. Heizer, W.D., Southern, S., and McGovern, S. (2009). The Role 
of Diet in Symptoms of Irritable Bowel Syndrome in Adults: 
A Narrative Review. J Am Diet Assoc, 109(7), 1204-1214. 
16. Hollis, J.F., Gullion, C.M., Stevens, V.J., Brantley, P.J., Appel, 
L.J., Ard, J.D., Champagne, C.M., Dalcin, A., Erlinger, T.P., 
Funk, K., Laferriere, D., Lin, P.-H., Loria, C.M., Samuel-Hodge, 
C., Vollmer, W.M., and Svetkey, L.P. (2008). Weight Loss 
During the Intensive Intervention Phase of the Weight-Loss 
Maintenance Trial. Am J Prev Med, 35(2), 118-126. 
17. Kanfer, F.H. (1970). Self-Monitoring: Methodological
Limitations and Clinical Applications. J Consult Clin
Psych, 35(2), 148-152.

18. Kong, F. and Tan, J. DietCam: Regular Shape Food

Recognition with a Camera Phone. BSN 2011, 127-132.
19. Lansky, D. and Brownell, K.D. (1982). Estimates of Food
Quantity and Calories: Errors in Self-Report among Obese
Patients. Am J Clin Nutr, 35(4), 727-732.

20. Livingstone, M.B., Prentice, A.M., Strain, J.J., Coward, W.A., 
Black, A.E., Barker, M.E., McKenna, P.G., and Whitehead, 
R.G. (1990). Accuracy of Weighed Dietary Records in Studies
of Diet and Health. BMJ, 300(6726), 708-712.

21. Mamykina, L., Mynatt, E., Davidson, P., and Greenblatt, D.
MAHI: Investigation of Social Scaffolding for Reflective
Thinking in Diabetes Management. CHI 2008, 477-486.

22. Mamykina, L., Mynatt, E.D., and Kaufman, D.R.

Investigating Health Management Practices of Individuals
with Diabetes. CHI 2006, 927-936.

23. Mankoff, J., Hsieh, G., Hung, H.C., Lee, S., and Nitao, E.

Using Low-Cost Sensing to Support Nutritional
Awareness. UbiComp 2002, 371-376.

24. Marr, J.W. (1971). Individual Dietary Surveys: Purposes

and Methods. World Rev Nutr Diet, 13, 105-164.

25. Mattila, E., Pärkkä, J., Hermersdorf, M., Kaasinen, J., Vainio, J., 
Samposalo, K., Merilahti, J., Kolari, J., Kulju, M., Lappalainen, 
R., and Korhonen, I. (2008). Mobile Diary for Wellness 
Management - Results on Usage and Usability in Two User 
Studies. IEEE Trans Inf Technol Biomed, 12(4), 501-512. 
26. Nelson, M., Atkinson, M., and Darbyshire, S. (1996). Food 

Photography II: Use of Food Photographs for Estimating Portion 
Size and the Nutrient Content of Meals. Br J Nutr, 76(1), 31-49. 

27. Noronha, J., Hysen, E., Zhang, H., and Gajos, K.Z.

Platemate: Crowdsourcing Nutritional Analysis from Food
Photographs. UIST 2011, 1-12.

28. Purpura, S., Schwanda, V., Williams, K., Stubler, W., and

Sengers, P. Fit4Life: The Design of a Persuasive Technology
Promoting Healthy Behavior and Ideal. CHI 2011, 423-432.
29. Rahman, T., Adams, A.T., Zhang, M., Cherry, E., Zhou, B.,
Peng, H., and Choudhury, T. BodyBeat: A Mobile System
for Sensing Non-Speech Body Sounds. MobiSys 2014, 2-13.
30. Sicherer, S.H. and Sampson, H.A. (2010). Food Allergy. J

Allergy Clin Immunol, 125(2 Suppl 2), S116-S125.

31. Stone, A.A., Shiffman, S., Schwartz, J.E., Broderick, J.E.,
and Hufford, M.R. (2003). Patient Compliance with Paper
and Electronic Diaries. Control Clin Trials, 24(2), 182-199.
32. Thomaz, E., Parnami, A., Essa, I., and Abowd, G.D. Feasibility 
of Identifying Eating Moments from First-Person Images 
Leveraging Human Computation. SenseCam 2013, 26-33. 
33. Tsai, C.C., Lee, G., Raab, F., Norman, G.J., Sohn, T., Griswold, 

W.G., and Patrick, K. (2007). Usability and Feasibility of 
PmEB: A Mobile Phone Application for Monitoring Real Time 
Caloric Balance. Mobile Netw Appl, 12(2-3), 173-184. 

34. Urist, J. My Fitness Band Is Making Me Fat: Users Complain 
of Weight Gain with Trackers. Today.com, July 16, 2014.
35. Wansink, B. and van Ittersum, K. (2007). Portion Size Me:
Downsizing Our Consumption Norms. J Am Diet Assoc,
107(7), 1103-1106.

36. Wilde, M.H. and Garvin, S. (2007). A Concept Analysis of

Self-Monitoring. J Adv Nurs, 57(3), 339-350.
37. Zepeda, L. and Deal, D. (2008). Think Before You Eat: 

Photographic Food Diaries as Intervention Tools to Change Dietary 
Decision Making and Attitudes. Int J Consum Stud, 32(6), 692-698. 

38. Zhu, F., Bosch, M., Boushey, C.J., and Delp, E.J. (2010).
An Image Analysis System for Dietary Assessment and
Evaluation. ICIP 2010, 1853-1856.

Understanding Health through Online BehaviorCHI 2015, Crossings, Seoul, Korea3216 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
