Scaffolding for an OLM for Long-Term Physical Activity Goals

Lie Ming Tang
University Of Sydney
Darlington, NSW, Australia
ltan8012@uni.sydney.edu.au

Judy Kay
University Of Sydney
Darlington, NSW, Australia
judy.kay@sydney.edu.au

ABSTRACT
An important role of open learner models (OLMs) is to support
self-reflection. We explore how to do this for an OLM based on
fine-grained long term physical activity tracker data that many
people are accumulating. We aim to tackle two well-documented
challenges that people face, in making effective use of an OLM for
reflection. 1. We created a tutorial to scaffold sense-making needed
to understand the meaning of the OLM. 2. We integrated an in-
terface scaffold to help users consider key questions for effective
reflection. We report the results of a qualitative think-aloud lab
study with 21 participants viewing their own long term OLM. To
evaluate the tutorial scaffolding, we split participants into an exper-
imental group, who did a tutorial before exploring the OLM and
a control group which explored the interface without the tutorial.
To evaluate the reflection scaffolding, all participants first explored
the interface as they wished. We then provided goal prompts to
scaffold reflection. Our study revealed that, under lab conditions,
the tutorial scaffolding was not needed − all participants in both
groups could readily understand the OLM. However, we found that
several of the goal prompts were important to help participants
consider key questions for effective reflection. Our key contribution
is insights into the design of scaffolding for reflection in a life-long
learning context of gaining insights and setting goals for physical
activity.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → User studies; Walkthrough
evaluations; Interaction design; User models;

KEYWORDS
OLM, Scaffolding, User Interface, Long Term Physical Activity Data

ACM Reference Format:
Lie Ming Tang and Judy Kay. 2018. Scaffolding for an OLM for Long-Term
Physical Activity Goals. In UMAP ’18: 26th Conference on User Modeling,
Adaptation and Personalization, July 8–11, 2018, Singapore, Singapore. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, Article 4, 10 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3209219.
3209220

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
UMAP ’18, July 8–11, 2018, Singapore, Singapore
© 2018 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5589-6/18/07. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3209219.3209220

1 INTRODUCTION
There is a growing body of work that aims to create Open Learner
Models (OLMs) to support meta-cognition [10, 17, 28, 38, 51]. Much
OLM research has been in the context of formal education. However,
this important role of user models is also important in life-long and
life-wide learning. In particular, one key role of an OLM is to support
self-reflection [5, 11, 13, 16, 17]. This is especially important for
achieving very long term goals, such as achieving and maintaining
healthy levels of physical activity [6, 32, 39]. OLMs can play several
important roles, including support users’ curiosity about their data,
allowing for playfulness in tracking style [44], learner trust [1] and
several broader important meta-cognitive activities [12, 13, 18, 25].
Our work aims to take insights from OLM research into the area
of personal informatics, where emerging sensor technologies enable
people to collect considerable personal data. We focus on the goal
to harness data from worn sensors about physical activity. Such
sensors are becoming ubiquitous with the emergence of dedicated
devices such as the Fitbit 1 as well as through ambient tracking via
non-dedicated devices such as smartphones 2 3. Our work takes
an OLM perspective, first to transform long term physical activity
data into a user model, then to create an OLM interface, called
iStuckWithIt, to support self-reflection on the user model.

In this paper, we consider two research questions about the

scaffolding for self-reflection using iStuckWithIt:

• Do users need a scaffolding introductory tutorial to self-

reflect using iStuckWithIt?

• Do users benefit from a reflection scaffold to systematically
self-reflect on core long term goals represented in the OLM?

To explore this, we conducted a lab study where 21 existing long
term physical activity trackers were asked to use iStuckWithIt [53],
with 2 additional scaffolding elements: tutorial introduction and
goal prompts for reflection. The tutorial scaffolding asks users to
review the data of 2 hypothetical users, with data that highlights
critical features of the dashboard. The goal prompt scaffolding is a
side panel (pop-up) that asks users to answer 5 questions about their
goals and their behaviour including whether they are achieving
their goal, whether they should change their goal and to consider
differences between when they are at work and not at work, week-
end and weekdays or on holidays. These questions prompt users
to considering their goal setting as well as how environmental
and temporal factors that are known to affect physical activity, as
documented in health literature [14].

The next section reviews related work followed by the study
design and results. We conclude with a discussion of the findings
and lessons learned for future designs.

1fitbit.com
2https://www.apple.com/au/ios/health/
3https://support.apple.com/en-au/HT203037

2 BACKGROUND
This section positions our work in relation to three bodies of previ-
ous research. First, we build on OLM research, where a user model
is made available to the user to support goals such as self-reflection.
Then we introduce the largely independent work on personal infor-
matics, including an overview of the design of the basic iStuckWithIt
interface. The third key strand is on meta-cognitive scaffolding for
OLMs. We then introduce the main iStuckWithIt interface and ex-
plain the goals of our work in terms of the new contributions we
aim to achieve.

Open Learner Modelling has a long history, beginning with
the recognition that a user model (also called student or learner
model) could be made available to the user [9, 31]. An OLM could
serve several roles, including the learner interacting to negotiate
or argue about the user model [9], supporting user control over
their personal data [31] and for metacognitive processes of self-
reflection, self-monitoring and planning [11, 13, 17]. There has
been considerable research on the ways to present learner models,
comparing various forms [13, 29]. There is also a body of studies
that have demonstrated their effectiveness for learning in formal
educational contexts [17, 38, 41, 42].

While OLM research has been largely concerned with formal
educational settings, emerging sensor and mobile technologies have
led to Personal Informatics research [34] and the similar Quantified
Self movement in the broader community4. These communities also
aim to create useful representations of users, available in interfaces
that have similar goals to OLMs. This community has demonstrated
that, while people see the potential value of such data for self-
reflection, current tools fail to support this well [15, 27, 35, 45, 47,
53]. Indeed, there is a growing body of evidence that points to a
lack of perceived usefulness of long term tracker data [26, 45, 46].
In personal informatics, the user models need to be designed to
represent aspects of user’s goals, linking the available sensor data
to those goals. A key problem in creating the model, and associated
OLM interfaces, relates to problems in the accuracy of the data due
to incompleteness. For example, a worn activity tracker only gives
reliable data when the user wears it and this should be considered
in reasoning about the user’s activity level and modelling their
goal achievement. Incomplete data compromises the usefulness of
tracking. People can lose confidence when they are confronted with
gaps or incorrect reports due to gaps [8, 45]. Failure to account for,
or recognise, incomplete data can mean that people consider the
data not to be useful which has been reported in recent years [19, 26,
30, 33, 45, 48, 54]. A similar problem has been identified for OLMs
for formal learning, with the need to represent the uncertainty in
the model [2, 21].

While the ideal OLM interface would be readily understood by
the user, in practice this may be difficult to achieve. Even with a
quite simple skillometer, consisting of just seven bars [37], there
were challenges in both understanding the model and the meaning
of the components display as well as in reflection. Self-evaluation is
especially important for achieving the very long term goals, such as
achieving and maintaining healthy levels of physical activity [6, 32,
39]. OLMs can play several important roles, including supporting
users’ curiosity about their data, allowing for playfulness in tracking

4http://quantifiedself.com/

style [44], facilitating learner trust [1] and several other important
meta-cognitive activities [12, 13, 18, 25].

This work explores the role of scaffolding for the iStuckWithIt
interface. The design of this interface and the nature of insights
people made when using it have been previously reported [53].
We now briefly introduce that version of the interface, as shown
at the left of Figure 1. Broadly, the design is based on a calendar
visualisation. The labels A-H illustrate key features. A marks the
drop-down menu to select the class of goal the user wants to see;
those in the study are steps per day, count of active minutes per day
and distance walked per day. The main interface is marked B for a
period when the user has data about their activity levels (with all
cells either white or shades of blue) and C when there was a period
with no data because the user did not wear their tracker in that
period (grey cells). The figure shows the interface configured for a
goal target of 10,000 steps a day and only cells exceeding this are
bright blue. The configuration in the figure sets a 50%, or 5,000 step
threshold for the lighter blue and then white indicates days that
have data (>= 1 step) but less than 5,000 steps. The bars marked
with D were designed to help the user take account of the impact of
their actual wearing behaviour on the results shows. The bars show
the average number of hours per day the user wore the tracker in
each week. When this is low, as in the case of weeks nearest the D,
the results are based on just the limited data that is available. In the
figure, the user has clicked on the cell near E to see more details
for that day. The upper middle is the configuration section, labeled
F. This enables the user to change the thresholds for the goals. The
right part of the figure, G, is the reflection scaffolding that is the
focus of this paper. H enables the user to alter the display from goal
oriented, as in this figure, to a gradient.

In summary, there has been considerable research in OLMs,
especially in formal educational settings. There is a growing body
of work in personal informatics and broader community interest in
Quantified Self. Both have identified a key challenge for effective
use of personal data − although they have not used the term, OLM,
they highlight the need for scaffolding to help people make sense of
complex collections of personal data, user models, so as to support
their self-reflection. Our work tackles this problem. This paper goes
beyond our previous report of iStuckWithIt’s design [53] as we now
describe the study of the two forms of scaffolding we explored for
the iStuckWithIt OLM interface: the tutorial scaffolding to introduce
the interface and the reflection scaffolding.

3 STUDY DESIGN
Our two research questions were:

• RQ1: Tutorial scaffold: Do users need a scaffolding introduc-

tory tutorial to self-reflect using iStuckWithIt?

• RQ2: Goal prompts scaffold: Do users benefit from a reflec-
tion scaffold to systematically self-reflect on core long term
goals represented in the OLM?

This section first describes the overall design of the study and

then the detailed design for each research question.

We recruited 21 long term Fitbit users, people who had collected
at least 6 months of personal physical activity data. We then con-
ducted a between-subjects lab study in terms of the first research
question. This study session had the following stages

(1) Nine participants (9) worked through the scaffolding tutorial,

(2) Large gaps of several months (blocks of grey cells) between

described below.

(2) All participants were asked to explore the main interface in
iStuckWithIt. We asked them to think-aloud [43], explaining
what they saw, understood and their insights.

(3) We then asked all participants to consider the reflective

questions, labeled (G) in Figure 1.

(4) Finally, we interviewed them on their experiences of viewing

their own data and what insights they learned.

In the next two sub-sections, we present the motivation and
design of the tutorial and goal prompt scaffolding. We also explain
the study design to evaluate each of them.

3.1 RQ1: Tutorial Scaffolding
While some long term physical activity trackers do use their tracker
over the long term, most fail to make use of their own long term
data [26, 45, 53]. This means that our study design should account
for the likelihood that the iStuckWithIt interface would provide the
first opportunity for participants to see their own long term goal
performance for physical activity, in terms of steps, active minutes
and distance. We anticipated that participants would benefit from
a tutorial that introduced them to iStuckWithIt.

To evaluate this, we prepared a tutorial, based on a set of exer-
cises to explore the iStuckWithIt OLM for two hypothetical users,
Alice and Alex. These provided carefully designed datasets which
highlighted key aspects that the interface was intended to enable
people to understand about their own long term physical activity
model. We asked 9 of our participants to complete this prior to
seeing iStuckWithIt with their own data. The steps in this tutorial
were:

(1) Participants were told that Alex and Alice’s each had a goal

of “at least 30 very active minutes per day”.

(2) Participants were asked to consider whether Alice achieved

her goal or not.

(3) They then did this for Alex.
(4) In each case, the experimenter allowed the participant to
explore the OLM, thinking aloud to explain how they inter-
preted it.

(5) At the end, if participants had failed to see and understand

key features, the experimenter explained them.

Figure 2 shows the data for Alice who started using her Fitbit in

August 2015. Key features are:

(1) The first month of tracking had quite high tracker use - few

grey cells;

(2) In mid-September, there is a 2-week gap in tracking - all grey

cells;

(3) After this, there are many grey cells, reflecting days Alice

did not wear her tracker, especially on weekends.

(4) Consistently higher wear time in August and September and
then consistently lower hourly wear-time after September.
(5) Scaffold users to reflect or speculate on the potential causes

for this change from Aug/Sept to afterwards.

Figure 1 shows Alex’s data which highlights the following:

(1) Low physical activity levels during weekend compared with

weekdays.

wearing activity tracker.

(3) Overall inconsistent hourly wear-time and some periods

with low wear-time.

We recorded observations and participant comments in their
think-aloud exploration of the interface. If, after some exploration,
the participant did not notice key aspects, they were prompted
about them. We also recorded whether the user commented on how
missing data could have affected accuracy of the step counts as well
as comments around wearing behaviour of Alice and Alex.

The aim of the tutorial scaffolding study is two-fold. First, we
wanted to discover which features of the long term physical ac-
tivity tracker data are easily understood and which are not. We
also wanted to see the impact of the tutorial, to learn whether par-
ticipants who had the extra learning scaffolding were better able
to make sense of their own data than those who did not do the
tutorial.

3.2 RQ2: Goal prompts scaffolding
After participants had finished exploring the main iStuckWithIt
interface with their own data, we asked them to open the goal
prompt scaffolding, labelled G at the right of Figure 1. This was
designed around two core forms of reflection:

(1) Reflect on goal achievement and consider reviewing the goal

setting − the first two questions, marked +.

(2) Reflect on factors affecting goal achievement − the last 3
prompts, also marked with +, about weekend (versus week-
days), holidays and work versus non-work.

The benefits of scaffolding or support for self-regulation skills
such as self-monitoring, goals and goal setting are well documented
[3, 4]. Also, previous work [49, 50] using goal setting as a strat-
egy to promote health and physical activity behaviour change has
demonstrated the potential of this approach. The first category of
our questions aims to remind users to reflect on their goals and goal
setting. The second category of questions called for the participant
to consider factors that are known to be important for people’s
physical activity levels. Health studies have consistently indicated
differences between activity levels on weekends versus weekdays
[7, 24, 52]. Moreover, previous studies have shown that by helping
users consider such questions can support reflection on activity
tracker data [22]. Therefore, our scaffolding design was based on
literature indicating the benefits of reminding users to consider the
context of their activity levels and behaviour is likely to be useful.
In addition to our prompt questions, we did consider others.
For example, studies of existing users of physical activity trackers
have reported that such users are quite interested in peaks and
lows [26, 36]. On the matter of influencing people to change track-
ing behaviour, Epstein et al. [23] found potential value in using
visualisations for encouraging users to return after a long gap in
tracker use. While these are potentially useful, we did not include
them as our focus was of studying whether people could make
sense of their data at the OLM interface and reflect on important
features associated with learning about their own long-term goal
achievement.

Figure 1: OLM to support reflection on achievement of long term physical activity goals. (A): Drop down menu to select between
datasets (i.e., steps, active minutes, distance). (B): Calendar visualisation, with colour showing activity level on each day − dark
blue means 10,000+ steps, light blue >5,000 but <10,000 steps, white has >0 but <5,000 steps. (C): Grey striped cells are days with
no data. (D): Bar graph showing average wear-time in hours per day for each week. (E): Pop-up showing additional details
of a particular day / cell. (F): Configuration − to adjust the thresholds for colouring of the cells. (G): Goal prompt scaffolding
questions.

did tutorial (Y) and 12 did not (N). In terms of background, many
participants were highly educated and several worked or studied in
IT, shown in Col. 5 and Col. 6. This group may have higher literacy
and skills levels in data analysis than a more general population.
This is similar to participants in other qualitative studies of existing
long term personal trackers [26]. There were more male participants
(14) than female (7). Our participants ages are spread across the age
groups shown in Col. 4 with 25-34 being the largest group at 6, the
lowest 18-24 (3) and 4 participants in the others. Our demographic
is similar, in terms of age and gender, to the population of personal
activity tracker users and wearable technology adopters [20]. The
duration of tracker use varied from 6 to 38 months shown in Col. 7
(average: 23 months).

Col. 8 shows the %-age of days with at least 1 step. This varied
widely (min: 15%, max: 100%, average: 68%, std: 30%). Col. 9 is the
wear-time (number of hours per day users with >= 1 step recorded).
Our participants generally had high wear-time (min: 9 hours, max:
20, average: 15, std: 3) and Col. 10 shows the standard deviation
(min: 2, max: 6, average: 4, std: 1). Col. 9 and Col. 10 show that while
overall wear-time is high there is large variation both between and
within individuals.

Overall, our participants had very wide differences in consis-
tency of days with tracking − the %-age of days with any data. For
example, 6 participants (P8, P9, P10, P14, P15 and P20) had 100% of

Figure 2: Data for hypothetical user Alice where she started
using data in August until Dec. Her daily wear-time declined
after September especially on weekends and wear-time is
also lower but consistent.

4 RESULTS
In this section, we first introduce the participants of our study then
we discuss the results around the two research questions.

4.1 Participants
Table 1 presents details of our participants, ordered by gender in Col.
2, then by scaffolding condition Col. 3. This shows 9 participants

Table 1: Participant profiles grouped by gender. Col. 1 par-
ticipant identifier. Col. 2 gender. Col. 3 whether participant
is in the tutorial scaffolding condition. Col. 4 to Col. 6 par-
ticipant age, occupation and education. Col. 7 duration in
months of tracking data (first to last day with data). Col. 8
%-age of days with at least 1 step Col. 7). Col. 9 and Col. 10
the median and standard deviation of wear-time (number
of hours per day with at least 1 step). The last 4 rows are
summary statistics over all participants (average, standard
deviation, min and max) of Col. 8, Col. 9 and Col. 10. N=21

Table 2: Table showing whether users identified each of the
notable items as part of their tutorial scaffolding. Row. 1
participant ID. Row. 2 %-age of days with at least 1 step. Row.
3 median hours per day with >1 step. Row. 4 to Row. 6 3 no-
table items in the Alice tutorial. Row. 7 to Row. 9 notable
items in the Alex tutorial Row. 10 notable items identified
by each participant as %-age of all 6 such items. N=9.

4.2 RQ1: Tutorial Scaffolding
Table 2 shows which notable item each participant identified for
hypothetical users, Alice from Row. 4 to Row. 6 and Alex, from
Row. 7 to Row. 9 during the tutorial scaffolding condition. All
participants identified at least 50% of these but none could identify
all items.

Our participants readily identified whole day wearing patterns,
distinguishing days with any data (appearing as white or light or
dark blue cells) against days with no data (grey cells). In the Alice
condition, all participants observed that she had more missing
days after September (Row. 4) and all commented or speculated
on the causes for this (Row. 6). For example, P20 commented on
Alice’s gap in data during September, “Stopped wearing in September,
October returned, maybe had gone on holiday”. In the Alex condition,
all participants commented on the large gaps between periods of
more consistent tracking over the 2 year period (Row. 8). They also
commented on Alex being more consistent in wearing his tracker
on more days in the second year.

The notion of the wear-time in terms of number of hours with
any data in a day, was harder for our participants to discover. Row.
5 shows that 4 participants (44%) did not comment on the low
wear-time for Alice after September. Moreover, only 2 participants
(22%) noticed the drop in Alice’s wear-time (Row. 5) as well as the
inconsistent wear-time across different months and years in Alex’s
data (Row. 9). P16 commented when viewing Alice’s data, “I see
she is not always using her tracker, especially in the last few months.
Only 4 - 5 hours per day” and when viewing Alex’s data “He used
to wear the tracker more longer than recently”. P21 when viewing
Alice’s data, “Towards the end, not only was [Alice] less active but
also wearing it for shorter periods”. When viewing Alex’s data, he
commented, “Alex is also more consistently wearing the tracker in
the second year.”.

days with data - meaning they wore their tracker every day in the
period from the first day to the last in the dataset. These partici-
pants also averaged higher wear-time within each day, recording
between 16 and 20 hours per day.

In contrast, the 6 participants with lowest consistency in wearing
the tracker had between 15% and 39% of days that had any data (P6,
P10, P2, P17, P20 and P18) and their median wear-time was 9 to 16
hours per day. Since in medical research 10 hours of wear-time is
considered sufficient for meaningful data [40], even those who av-
eraged 9 hours (P6) may have acceptable data quality. Interestingly,
these 2 groups of users had similar wear-time variation indicated
by the standard deviation (i.e., variation in the number of hours per
day with at least 1 step) between averaging 4 hours for lower daily
adherence users and 3 for highly daily adherent users.

These participant statistics indicate that while there are large
variations in the number of days with data (%-age of days with at
least 1 step) all participants had high wear-time.

Interestingly, most participants (3 of 4) who commented or re-
flected on wear-time also commented on their own wear-time when
viewing their own data during the think-aloud. (The outlier is P16
the sole participant who did not have wear-time data).

Notably, several participants in the control condition − who did
not do the tutorial scaffolding, also commented on wear-time in
their own data. For example, P12 commented on how the hours of
wear (wear-time) may affect his activity levels, “If I wear my tracker
longer, it will track more of my activity. I take off my tracker when I
get home. So maybe I should just leave my tracker on myself at home
as well to get more steps, little steps I do walking around home”. P4
was surprised at the number of hours she wore her tracker, “I was
surprised I was wearing it for 19 hours”. When investigating a day
that had very low steps as well as hours of wear, P5 commented, “I
thought I wore it for longer that day, it could be that I bumped it and
turned it off. I think it happens sometimes when I bump it”.

Row. 7 indicates that only 3 participants (33%) noticed the sub-
stantially lower steps and lower days with any data on weekends.
One of the three who did, P7 reflected on the differences between
Alice and Alex, commenting, “Alex didn’t wear it on weekends, which
I didn’t notice on Alice”.

Row. 2 and Row. 3 of Table 2 shows each participant’s own daily
%-age of days with data (Daily Adherence) and wear-time against
the number of notable items in each tutorial scenario. This shows
the completeness of their own data, so we can see this against the
notable items they identified. For example, P6 had the lowest median
wear-time (9 hours per day) and P5 had the lowest daily adherence
(with just 15% of days with data). During the scaffolding tutorial,
we found several cases where users related their own experiences
and thinking when viewing these 2 hypothetical user’s data. For
example, P5 explained their low, 15% of days with data, was due
to significant medical conditions, and commented “Sometimes she
doesn’t wear her tracker, so she’s like me”. P17 who had 38% daily
adherence commented, “I can see Alex is achieving his goal. But as
time passes, he started to drop in his wear. In the beginning, I think he
is more motivated, like myself as well.”. When looking at Alice’s data,
P17 commented, “I think people forget to wear or perhaps it doesn’t
match the fashion”. Interestingly, when he explored his own long
term data, after the tutorial, he explained that he stopped wearing
his Fitbit tracker because his did a sport that required a wrist based
apparel that prevented him from wearing his Fitbit. His earlier
speculation on the reason for Alice’s missing days could be due to
fashion concerns, is similar to this reasoning. P21 commented, “I
can see there are some days where Alex forgot to wear it or forgot
to track properly − maybe she was on holiday or something”. When
analysing his own long term tracker data, P21 who has relatively
high daily adherence (91%) commented on the days he did not wear
the tracker due to holidays and work travels. P18 who has daily
adherence of 44% also commented on the motivational effect of
adherence and missing data, “She was very consistent but she stopped.
I think it’s discouraging to have so much missing data.”.

This section summarised results for the first research question
which explored whether the tutorial scaffold was needed and useful.
Comparing the participants’ understanding of their own iStuck-
WithIt OLM, we observed that participants in both the tutorial and
control conditions could understand the main features in terms of
days the goals were met and how to interpret the display of days

Table 3: Summary of participant insights triggered by scaf-
folding of the goal prompt questions. Col. 1 the participant
ID. Col. 3 daily adherence (%-age of days with >1 step). Col. 4
wear-time (median hours of wear per day with >1 step). Col.
5 to Col. 8 the 4 types of insights associated with the goal
prompt questions. N=21

with any data. Both groups also performed similarly on wear-time
(median hours of wear per day with >1 step), with most people tend-
ing to miss this aspect and similar levels of awareness of it between
the conditions. Overall, both conditions performed similarly.

4.3 RQ2: Goal Prompts
We now consider the results for the scaffolding for reflection. While
the tutorial was done only be the 9 participants in the tutorial
group, all participants then used the interface to explore their own
data. When they had finishing doing this, the experimenter asked
them to open the scaffolding section of the interface to consider
the questions intended to help them consider and reflect on key
features. Table 3 summarises the new insights that participants
gained in this scaffolded reflection phase. Col. 5 to Col. 7of the table
show where the goal prompt enabled a participant to gain new
insights in addition to those the experimenter recorded them as
making already.

When asked about weekend versus weekdays, 8 participants
(38%) identified new insights − shown in Col. 5. For example, P4
commented, “I’m not doing very well on weekends”. Interestingly,
this was only true more recently in the last year because she was
more active during weekends and weekdays in the previous year

in her data. P14 was confident during the think-aloud and pre-
interview that he was more active on weekend than weekdays.
“More physically active during weekends because I go hiking or some-
thing”. However, his actual data contradicts this belief and during
the think-aloud session, he did not seem to identify this. When
prompted by the goal prompt panel questions, he considered this
more closely and commented, “When I see on your website, there is
a lot of white [referring to weekends]. I wonder why that is”. During
post interview, when asked if he found anything surprising, he com-
mented, “I thought I was hitting my step goals more than I was on
the weekends, it was definitely an eye opener”. P21 commenting on
doing better on weekends, “I’m actually overshooting my goal, quite
consistently”. P7 commented on the differences between Saturday
and Sundays, “good on Saturday but not on Sundays”.

Our participants were generally aware of their work versus non-
work periods and most made observations about this during the
think-aloud session when they reflected on their own data. The
goal prompt questions helped 2 participants find something new,
shown in Col. 6. P14 commented that he is not doing as well during
work times, “I seem to have a little more difficulty especially when
I’m in the car a lot”. P13 commented, “Doing well when going to the
office, not so well when working from home. More recently working
during the week has been less good”. During the post interview, when
asked whether he learned something new, he commented, “Going
through the Goal prompts, it got me to think about things like looking
at weekends versus during the week − it definitely got me thinking
about different ways to divide up my time”. This question did not
apply to 2 participants (P9,P1) because they did not work or study.
For example, P9 commented, “doesn’t matter because weekend and
weekdays are pretty much the same to me, I’m retired”.

During the main think-aloud exploration of iStuckWithIt, most
participants reflected on the effect of holidays − this was triggered
by visible trends in their own goal achievement. The goal prompt
question (Col. 7) helped 4 participants (19%) find more. For exam-
ple, P21 went back to the iStuckWithIt display, reviewing holiday
periods more closely and commented, “I’m mixed on holidays, there
are some holidays where I do walking, there are holidays where I
was in [location] , ... , wasn’t wearing it back there, I was wearing
it sometimes but not much”. P7 reflected on their broad wearing
patterns, daily and hourly, during holidays, “generally I forget to
wear it, and I don’t take it often and I fear losing it, and I don’t want
to take all the charging cables”. Others focused on goal achievement
consistency, for example, P9 commented, “I walked on Christmas
day. I walked on New Year’s Day − so I’m quite consistent”.

While most participants reflected upon both their activity levels
and wearing behaviour in the main session exploring iStuckWithIt,
the goal prompt questions helped 4 participants (19%) to consider
changing their goal targets. For example, P21 commented, “I guess
I should lower it to something more realistic to achieve that the 10K
steps per day. Maybe if I change to 8K”. P14, after realising that he
was less active on weekends commented, “I want to make sure I hit
my step goals more on the weekends, walking a little bit more”. P9
commented, “I should change my goal because I’m exceeding it too
easily.”. Notably, P4 was confused by the wording of the prompt
and failed to see the usefulness of this question. She commented,
“I don’t understand why this question is here, I compare myself to
myself, it doesn’t matter to me”.

Not all participants considered the goal prompts useful. For
example, P16 commented, “I think the ideas of these questions are
interesting but these ones are not as useful for me. I prefer it gives
me advice or record what I did”. P16 also suggested that a prompt
about how he achieved a goal each day might be useful in helping
him remember. “I think if each day when I achieve the goal, I get a
question about how I achieved the goal, I think that could be useful. It
might be useful if it can help me remember how I achieved the goal”.
P21 commented, “I’m not sure how I would use it, I don’t have so
many goals that I have to write them down”. He went on to suggest
that these types of prompts might be better integrated into the
regular weekly email that that Fitbit currently sends − he suggest
this should also highlight notable items, like peaks and ask for
reflection on those days then. “I would like to be prompted as part
of the weekly email if there was something interesting e.g., 28K steps
days, to note things like I went hiking into the note. It would be nice
to have it integrated with my weekly email to complement what I
currently see”.

To summarize, the goal prompt helped 10 participants (48%) gain
new insights and 7 of these participants gained two or more insights.
Broadly, our results indicate that the goal prompt scaffolding for
reflection is valuable.

5 DISCUSSION
To understand our long term OLM, and reflect on their long term
behaviour and its implications, users needed to make sense of their
long term data. Our interface transforms that data into an OLM
which highlight two key aspects. It shows a person’s apparent goal
achievement, in terms of how they did compared with their target for
steps per day, active minutes or distance. However, to related this to
the actual activity level, they also need to appreciate the implications
of their wearing behaviour. This determines the completeness and
meaningfulness of their data. The tutorial scaffold was intended to
both support this and to enable us to study how readily people could
learn about these aspects with all tutorial condition participants
doing this in the context of two sets of carefully designed data, for
the hypothetical users Alice and Alex. This section first considers
what we learnt from the study of the tutorial scaffolding. We then
discuss what our findings reveal about goal prompt scaffolding.
Finally, we discuss lessons learned and insights for designing future
OLMs for this class of lifelong, life-wide learning for an important
aspect of health.

No tutorial is needed to understand daily goal
achievement trends (RQ1)
Our study results show that all participants, in either the tutorial
or control group found it easy to see that blocks of missing data
(grey cells) meant there was no data and that other cells indicated
whether they met their goal. In the tutorial condition, participants
could do this without assistance for the case of both Alice and Alex.
They then went on to make a similar interpretation of their own
data. The control condition participants also found this aspect of
the interface intuitive and a good basis for reflection about the
reasons they met their goals, commenting on aspects like holidays,
injury and motivation. So, the tutorial was not needed for this case.

The tutorial did not make a difference in
helping people understand wear-time (RQ1)
We observed that a minority of participants could discover this
from the carefully crafted data for Alice and Alex. Only 56% of
participants noted the low wear-time for Alice in the later months
of tracking. Even fewer speculated or commented on its meaning.
Moreover, only 2 participants noticed inconsistent wear-time for
Alex over the long term. Our design of the tutorial was based on
providing very clear cases that should have made this concept easier
to discover. For the participants who did not work this out, the
experimenter explained it to them. Our observations of participants
studying their own data indicate that both the tutorial and control
condition participants performed similarly on this aspect. So, the
tutorial was not helpful for this case and further, many participants
found it difficult to appreciate the concept of wear-time. This is
unfortunate since it is critical to take account of the number of hours
with data to judge whether there is enough data to conclude about
whether they have met their goal. There appear to be two main ways
to tackle this problem. First, we may need to help people appreciate
the importance of taking account of wear-time, particularly the
number of hours of wear in a day. Second, the interface should
make this clearer than it currently does.

Can scaffolding support insights? (RQ2)
We designed iStuckWithIt to present and overview model of people’s
goal achievement for levels of physical activity. The goal prompt
scaffolding was designed to help users reflect on questions that
they may not have considered when reviewing their own data. Our
study showed that even for our population of existing long term
physical activity trackers who are highly educated and familiar
with technology, the goal prompt scaffolding could help many of
them reflect on important aspects that they had not considered.
Our results showed that while iStuckWithIt design was useful in
supporting reflection on its own, the goal prompt scaffold helped
many to consider and discover insights they missed.

Adherence scaffolding design: lessons learned
In this section, we discuss lessons learned and opportunities for
future user interfaces that aims to support daily adherence and
wear-time for reflecting on long term physical activity data.

First, our results suggest that a more adaptive or personalised
approach is needed to teach about wear-time. This should take
account of the user’s actual wear-time. For people who had high
wear-time (e.g., 15 hours or more per day) and consistent wear (near
100% of days have >0 steps), there is no need to consider wear-time
when interpreting the interface’s goal achievement display. In this
case, future interfaces could highlight just the low wear-time days.
The configuration interface could be enhanced to define suitable
thresholds for this. Then the interface could filter the display to
show only days that meet the threshold. For those who do not have
high wear-time, further work is needed. However, since our long
term physical activity tracker participants had high wear-time we
have limited information for this type of user.

The goal prompt scaffolding findings demonstrate the insights
gained by half our participants, by considering salient aspects. This
is also an opportunity for personalisation, so that the cases that

deserve attention are provided as prompts. This is particularly
likely to be valuable for real world use, rather than our laboratory
study. It will be important in ensuring users can readily tackle the
challenge of reflection, when confronted for the first time with
an unfamiliar OLM interface for their long term performance on
physical activity. Opportunities for scaffolding include highlighting
aspects known to be important, such as weekend versus weekdays,
asking users to consider their performance and behaviour across
different environments (e.g., work versus non-work). Our findings
show that there is a need to personalise such prompts based on the
individual’s behaviour. Prompts or questions that do not apply to
the participants or do not fit the user’s circumstances (e.g., work
situation) or goals should not be shown.

Finally, it may be useful to send goal prompts or reflective ques-
tions via regular email messages to capture contextual and qual-
itative information about days of interest (e.g., what did they do
or how they achieved a peak day or goal-met day). Participant
comments suggest they believe capturing such data may help them
remember to consider and reflect on goal prompt questions.

5.1 Limitations
Our study was restricted to existing FitBit users. As FitBits had
been widely available for many years 5, this allowed us to recruit
participants who has already collected long term data. Also, our
study is a lab study of the scaffolding designs. This may limit gener-
alisability of our findings for wider populations of activity trackers
in authentic settings. Moreover, since the iStuckWithIt user inter-
face and study was designed for long term data, the usefulness of
our scaffolding design on short term data was not examined. Our
work paves the way for longer term field studies. Further work
is still needed on scaffolding designs that help people understand
the impact of data incompleteness in short term physical activity
tracker data.

6 CONCLUSION
In this study, we explored how to help people reflect on their long
term physical activity goal achievement. We extended previous
work by exploring two forms of scaffolding (tutorial, goal prompt)
and reported on a lab study of 21 existing long term physical ac-
tivity tracker’s experiences. The tutorial scaffolding results reveal
that missing or incompleteness in data on a day-to-day basis (daily
adherence) is intuitive and well understood. However, for wear-
time (hours of wear per day), it may be more appropriate to provide
prompts and alerts based on automatic detection of features such
as low wear-time on certain days, weeks or highlighting inconsis-
tencies over time. In addition, our prompt scaffolding (reflective
questionnaire) proved effective support for reflection, resulting in
new insights. We go beyond previous OLM work, particularly in
the focus on a lifelong, life-wide learning goal associated with long
term physical activity goal achievement. Our findings provide de-
sign insights about these two scaffolding approaches apply, with
recommendations on future work and potential roles for reflection
scaffolding and its personalisation.

5http://www.wareable.com/fitbit/fitness-tracker-sales-2015-fitbit-1169

REFERENCES
[1] Norasnita Ahmad and Susan Bull. 2009. Learner Trust in Learner Model Exter-

nalisations.. In AIED. 617–619.

[2] Lamiya Al-Shanfari, Carrie Demmans Epp, and Susan Bull. 2016. Uncertainty in
Open Learner Models: Visualising Inconsistencies in the Underlying Data.. In
LAL@ LAK. 23–30.

[3] Roger Azevedo and Jennifer G Cromley. 2004. Does training on self-regulated
learning facilitate students’ learning with hypermedia? Journal of educational
psychology 96, 3 (2004), 523.

[4] Albert Bandura. 2005. The growing centrality of self-regulation in health promo-
tion and disease prevention. The european health psychologist 1 (2005), 11–12.
[5] Albert Bandura. 2005. The Primacy of Self-Regulation in Health Promotion.

Applied Psychology 54, 2 (apr 2005), 245–254.

[6] Debjanee Barua, Judy Kay, Bob Kummerfeld, and Cécile Paris. 2014. Modelling
long term goals. In International Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation, and
Personalization. Springer, 1–12.

[7] Timothy K. Behrens and Mary K. Dinger. 2005. Ambulatory Physical Activity
Patterns of College Students. American Journal of Health Education 36, 4 (2005),
221–227.

[8] F Bentley, K Tollmar, and P Stephenson. 2013. Health Mashups: Presenting
Statistical Patterns between Wellbeing Data and Context in Natural Language to
Promote Behavior Change. Tochi 20, 5 (2013), 1–27.

[9] Susan Bull, Paul Brna, and Helen Pain. 1995. Extending the scope of the student

model. User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction 5, 1 (1995), 45–65.

[10] Susan Bull, Blandine Ginon, Clelia Boscolo, and Matthew Johnson. 2016. Intro-
duction of Learning Visualisations and Metacognitive Support in a Persuadable
Open Learner Model. In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on
Learning Analytics & Knowledge (LAK ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 30–39.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2883851.2883853

[11] Susan Bull and Judy Kay. 2010. Open learner models. In Advances in intelligent

tutoring systems. Springer, 301–322.

[12] Susan Bull and Judy Kay. 2013. Open learner models as drivers for metacognitive
processes. In International handbook of metacognition and learning technologies.
Springer, 349–365.

[13] Susan Bull and Judy Kay. 2016. SMILI: a framework for interfaces to learning
data in open learner models, learning analytics and related fields. International
Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education 26, 1 (2016), 293–331.

[14] Lisa Cadmus-Bertram, Bess H Marcus, Ruth E Patterson, Barbara A Parker, and
Brittany L Morey. 2015. Use of the Fitbit to Measure Adherence to a Physical
Activity Intervention Among Overweight or Obese, Postmenopausal Women:
Self-Monitoring Trajectory During 16 Weeks. JMIR mHealth and uHealth 3, 4
(2015), e96.

[15] Eun Kyoung Choe, Bongshin Lee, Haining Zhu, Nathalie Henry Riche, and Do-
minikus Baur. 2017. Understanding Self-Reflection: How People Reflect on
Personal Data through Visual Data Exploration. In Proceedings of the 11th EAI
International Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare (Per-
vasiveHealthâĂŹ17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, Vol. 10.

[16] Edward L Deci and Richard M Ryan. 2000. The" what" and" why" of goal pursuits:
Human needs and the self-determination of behavior. Psychological inquiry 11, 4
(2000), 227–268.

[17] Michel C Desmarais and Ryan S Baker. 2012. A review of recent advances in
learner and skill modeling in intelligent learning environments. User Modeling
and User-Adapted Interaction 22, 1-2 (2012), 9–38.

[18] Melissa C Duffy and Roger Azevedo. 2015. Motivation matters: Interactions
between achievement goals and agent scaffolding for self-regulated learning
within an intelligent tutoring system. Computers in Human Behavior 52 (2015),
338–348.

[19] Chris Elsden, David S Kirk, and Abigail C Durrant. 2015. A Quantified Past:
Toward Design for Remembering With Personal Informatics. Human–Computer
Interaction (2015), 1–40.

[20] Endeavour. 2014. Inside wearables part 2, How the Science of Behavior Change Of-
fers the Secret to Long-Term Engagement. https://blog.endeavour.partners/inside-
wearable-how-the-science-of-human-behavior-change-offers-the-secret-to-long-
term-engagement-a15b3c7d4cf3 Jan (2014). https://doi.org/wp-content/uploads/
2015/11/2014-Inside-Wearables-Part-2-July-2014.pdf

[21] Carrie Demmans Epp and Susan Bull. 2015. Uncertainty representation in visual-
izations of learning analytics for learners: current approaches and opportunities.
IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies 8, 3 (2015), 242–260.

[22] Daniel Epstein, Felicia Cordeiro, Elizabeth Bales, James Fogarty, and Sean Munson.
2014. Taming data complexity in lifelogs: exploring visual cuts of personal
informatics data. In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive
systems. ACM, 667–676.

[23] Daniel A Epstein, Jennifer H Kang, Laura R Pina, James Fogarty, and Sean A
Munson. 2016. Reconsidering the device in the drawer: lapses as a design oppor-
tunity in personal informatics. In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing. ACM, 829–840.

[24] Stuart J Fairclough, Lynne M Boddy, Kelly a Mackintosh, Alexandra Valencia-
Peris, and Elena Ramirez-Rico. 2014. Weekday and weekend sedentary time and

physical activity in differentially active children. Journal of Science and Medicine
in Sport In Press (2014). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsams.2014.06.005

[25] Reza Feyzi-Behnagh, Roger Azevedo, Elizabeth Legowski, Kayse Reitmeyer, Eu-
gene Tseytlin, and Rebecca S Crowley. 2014. Metacognitive scaffolds improve
self-judgments of accuracy in a medical intelligent tutoring system. Instructional
science 42, 2 (2014), 159–181.

[26] Thomas Fritz, Elaine M Huang, Gail C Murphy, and Thomas Zimmermann. 2014.
Persuasive technology in the real world: a study of long-term use of activity
sensing devices for fitness. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 487–496.

[27] Rúben Gouveia, Evangelos Karapanos, and Marc Hassenzahl. 2015. How do we
engage with activity trackers?: a longitudinal study of Habito. In Proceedings of the
2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing.
ACM, 1305–1316.

[28] Julio Guerra. 2016. Open Social Learner Models for Self-Regulated Learning
and Learning Motivation. In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on User Modeling
Adaptation and Personalization. ACM, 329–332.

[29] Julio Guerra-Hollstein, Jordan Barria-Pineda, Christian D Schunn, Susan Bull,
and Peter Brusilovsky. 2017. Fine-Grained Open Learner Models: Complexity
Versus Support. In Proceedings of the 25th Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation
and Personalization. ACM, 41–49.

[30] Daniel Harrison, Paul Marshall, Nadia Bianchi-Berthouze, and Jon Bird. 2015.
Activity tracking: barriers, workarounds and customisation. In Proceedings of the
2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing.
ACM, 617–621.

[31] Judy Kay. 1994. The um toolkit for cooperative user modelling. User Modeling

and User-Adapted Interaction 4, 3 (1994), 149–196.

[32] Judy Kay. 2016. Enabling people to harness and control EDM for lifelong, life-wide

learning.. In EDM. 10–20.

[33] Amanda Lazar, Christian Koehler, Joshua Tanenbaum, and David H Nguyen.
2015. Why we use and abandon smart devices. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing. ACM,
635–646.

[34] Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A stage-based model of personal
informatics systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems. ACM, 557–566.

[35] Ian Li, Anind K Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2011. Understanding my data, myself:
supporting self-reflection with ubicomp technologies. In Proceedings of the 13th
international conference on Ubiquitous computing (UbiComp ’11). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 405–414.

[36] Ian Li, Anind K. Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2012. Using context to reveal factors that
affect physical activity. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 19, 1
(2012), 1–21.

[37] Yanjin Long and Vincent Aleven. 2011. StudentsâĂŹ understanding of their
student model. In International Conference on Artificial Intelligence in Education.
Springer, 179–186.

[38] Yanjin Long and Vincent Aleven. 2013. Supporting studentsâĂŹ self-regulated
learning with an open learner model in a linear equation tutor. In Artificial
intelligence in education. Springer, 219–228.

[39] Alessandro Marcengo, Amon Rapp, Federica Cena, and Marina Geymonat. 2016.
The Falsified Self: Complexities in Personal Data Collection. UAHCI 2016 9737
(2016), 351–358. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-40250-5

[40] Jairo H. Migueles, Cristina Cadenas-Sanchez, Ulf Ekelund, Christine Delisle
Nystr??m, Jose Mora-Gonzalez, Marie L??f, Idoia Labayen, Jonatan R. Ruiz, and
Francisco B. Ortega. 2017. Accelerometer Data Collection and Processing Criteria
to Assess Physical Activity and Other Outcomes: A Systematic Review and
Practical Considerations. Sports Medicine (2017), 1–25. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s40279-017-0716-0

[41] Antonija Mitrovic and Brent Martin. 2002. Evaluating the effects of open student
models on learning. In International Conference on Adaptive Hypermedia and
Adaptive Web-Based Systems. Springer, 296–305.

[42] Antonija Mitrovic and Brent Martin. 2007. Evaluating the effect of open student
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in

models on self-assessment.
Education 17, 2 (2007), 121–144.

[43] Jakob Nielsen. 1994. Usability engineering. Elsevier.
[44] Amon Rapp and Federica Cena. 2016. Personal Informatics for Everyday Life:
How Users without Prior Self-Tracking Experience Engage with Personal Data.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies (2016).

[45] Amon Rapp and Federica Cena. 2016. Personal Informatics for Everyday Life:
How Users without Prior Self-Tracking Experience Engage with Personal Data.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies 94 (2016), 1–17.

[46] John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and Matthew Chalmers Chalmers.
2014. Personal tracking as lived informatics. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual
ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems. ACM, 1163–1172.

[47] Brenda Rooney, Kathy Smalley, Jennifer Larson, and Sarah Havens. 2003.

Is
knowing enough? Increasing physical activity by wearing a pedometer. WMJ-
MADISON- 102, 4 (2003), 31–36.

[48] Patrick C Shih, Kyungsik Han, Erika Shehan Poole, Mary Beth Rosson, and
John M Carroll. 2015. Use and adoption challenges of wearable activity trackers.
iConference 2015 Proceedings (2015).

[49] Mical Kay Shilts, Marcel Horowitz, and Marilyn S Townsend. 2004. Goal setting
as a strategy for dietary and physical activity behavior change: a review of
the literature. American journal of health promotion : AJHP 19, 2 (2004), 81–93.
https://doi.org/10.4278/0890-1171-19.2.81

[50] V J Strecher, G H Seijts, G J Kok, G P Latham, R Glasgow, B DeVellis, R M
Meertens, and D W Bulger. 1995. Goal setting as a strategy for health behavior
change. Health education quarterly 22, 2 (1995), 190–200. https://doi.org/10.1177/
109019819502200207

[51] Bernardo Tabuenca, Marco Kalz, Hendrik Drachsler, and Marcus Specht. 2015.
Time will tell: The role of mobile learning analytics in self-regulated learning.

Computers & Education 89 (2015), 53–74.

[52] Lie Ming Tang, Margot Day, Lina Engelen, Philip Poronnik, Adrian Bauman, and
Judy Kay. 2016. Daily & Hourly Adherence: Towards Understanding Activity
Tracker Accuracy. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, 3211–3218.

[53] Lie Ming Tang and Judy Kay. 2017. Harnessing Long Term Physical Activity
Data: How Long-term Trackers Use Data and How an Adherence-based Interface
Supports New Insights. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 1,
2 (jun 2017), 26:1—-26:28. https://doi.org/10.1145/3090091

[54] Rayoung Yang, Eunice Shin, Mark W Newman, and Mark S Ackerman. 2015.
When fitness trackers don’t’fit’: end-user difficulties in the assessment of personal
tracking device accuracy. In Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing. ACM, 623–634.

