Self-tracking Cultures: Towards a Sociology of Personal 
Informatics 

Deborah Lupton 
News & Media Research Centre 
Faculty of Arts & Design 
University of Canberra 
Bruce 2601 ACT 
deborah.lupton@canberra.edu.au 

in 

terms  of 

ABSTRACT 
A body of literature on self-tracking has been established 
in  human-computer  interaction  studies.  Contributors  to 
this  literature  tend  to  take  a  cognitive  or  behavioural 
psychology  approach  to  theorising  and  explaining  self-
tracking.  Such  an  approach  is  limited  to  understanding 
individual  behaviour.  Yet  self-tracking  is  a  profoundly 
social  practice,  both 
the  enculturated 
meanings  with  which  it  is  invested  and  the  social 
encounters and social institutions that are part of the self-
tracking  phenomenon.  In  this  paper  I  contend  that 
sociological  perspectives  can  contribute  some  intriguing 
possibilities  for  human-computer  interaction  research, 
particularly  in  developing  an  understanding  of  the  wider 
social, cultural and political dimensions of what I refer to 
as ‘self-tracking cultures’. The discussion focuses on the 
following topics: self-optimisation and governing the self; 
entanglements  of  bodies 
the 
valorisation of data; data doubles; and social  inequalities 
and  self-tracking.  The  paper  ends  with  outlining  some 
directions for future research on self-tracking cultures that 
goes beyond the individual to the social. 

technologies; 

and 

Author Keywords 
Self-tracking;  Personal  Informatics:  Sociology;  Culture; 
Selfhood; Theory 

ACM Classification Keywords 
K4.2: Social Issues  

INTRODUCTION 
The concepts of ‘self-tracking’ and the ‘quantified self’
(also referred to as life-logging, personal analytics and 
personal informatics) have recently begun to emerge in 
discussions of how best to optimise one’s life. These
concepts refer to the practice of gathering data about 
oneself on a regular basis and then recording and  

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org.
OzCHI '14 , December 02 - 05 2014, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-0653-9/14/12…$15.00
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2686612.2686623

77

analysing the data to produce statistics and other data 
(such as images) relating to regular habits, behaviours and 
feelings. 

The advent of digital technologies able to assist in the 
collecting, measuring, computation and display of these 
data has been vitally important in promoting the cause of 
self-tracking. Mobile and wearable digital devices 
connected to the internet have facilitated the ever more 
detailed measurement and monitoring of the body and 
everyday life in real time and the analysis, presentation 
and sharing of these data. Hundreds of apps have been 
developed for achieving digitised self-tracking. The 
Quantified Self website lists over 500 self-tracking tools 
(Quantified Self guide to self-tracking tools, 2014), 
including in addition to geolocation, health, fitness, 
weight, sleep, diet and mood or feeling tracking apps, 
services and devices those that record social interactions, 
emails, networks and social media status updates and 
comments as well as meditation practices, television 
watching, computer use and driving habits, financial 
expenses, time use, beneficial habits and work 
productivity and monitor environmental conditions, 
progress towards learning or the achievement of goals. 

There are an increasing number of specifically designed 
devices such as the Fitbit, Jawbone’s Up, Nike Fuelband 
and various brands of adhesive patches that are available 
for self-tracking. All of these are designed to be worn 
upon the body to automatically collect data on bodily 
functions such as physical activity, pulse, heart rate, body 
temperature, calories burned, brain waves and sleep 
patterns. Some can be worn 24 hours a day to provide 
constant readings of body metrics. Digital body weight 
scales, blood oxygen saturation monitors and blood 
pressure monitors that link to smartphones are also on the 
market. Some devices collect environmental conditions 
such as air temperature, humidity, air quality and UV, 
while others generate information on home energy use.  

In addition to these technologies are the growing range of 
‘smart ‘ objects: digitised gadgets, shoes, clothing or 
furniture embedded with sensors (including forks, 
toothbrushes and watering cans) and small wearable 
cameras that are equipped to take hundreds of photos 
automatically each day. Web platforms and services are 
available to aggregate data and compare them with 

others’ data. To motivate users, several self-tracking 
technologies include ‘gamification’ strategies. These use
built-in reward or docking systems so that points or real 
money can be collected or paid if various commitments 
(to regular exercise or weight loss goals, for example) are 
either met or unmet, as well as websites where users’ data
can be competitively compared with other self-trackers 
(for example the cycling platform Strava). Apps are even 
available that allow people to track their sexual activities, 
rate their partners and compare their stamina and 
performance with other users (Lupton, 2014a). 

A growing literature is developing in human-computer 
interaction (HCI) studies by researchers addressing 
elements of self-tracking. This research has been valuable 
in identifying such factors as the personal benefits and 
rewards that people gain from engaging in self-tracking 
and the reasons why people take up, discard or continue 
these practices (Kamal et al., 2010; Li et al., 2010; Li et 
al., 2011; MacLeod et al., 2013; Rooksby et al., 2014). 
Some researchers in HCI  have also investigated design 
features and assessed prototypes of novel self-tracking 
technologies (Bentley et al., 2013; Epstein et al., 2014; 
Fan et al., 2012; Khot et al., 2013; Khovanskaya et al., 
2013). Researchers in persuasive computing focus their 
studies on the use of self-tracking technologies in 
persuading people to change their behaviours in the 
interests of their health or wellbeing. Self-tracking in this 
literature is represented as a means of motivation, 
encouraging self-reflection or emotional responses such 
as fear, guilt or shame that will lead to such changes 
(MacLeod et al., 2013; Purpura et al., 2011; Thieme et al., 
2012). 

Most of these researchers take a cognitive or social 
psychological approach which focuses on the individual’s
response to self-tracking. In their review of how online 
social networks for personal informatics can be used to 
promote health behavioural change, for example, Kamal 
et al. (2010) draw on psychological models of behaviour 
such as the uses and gratification theory, organisational 
commitment theory, social identity theory, the health 
belief model, the theory of reasoned action and diffusion 
of innovation. In a well-cited paper in the personal 
informatics literature, Li et al. (2010) use what they call a 
‘stage-based model of personal informatics systems’ to
outline five psychological stages that they identify in the 
process of engaging in self-tracking: preparation, 
collection integration, reflection and action.  

While psychological  processes are an integral dimension 
of how people respond to self-tracking devices, in their 
focus on the individual they do not explain the wider 
dimensions of the practice, or what I call ‘self-tracking 
cultures’. Such a perspective does not elucidate the
meanings that position the practice of self-tracking in 
specific ways and explain the particular resonances and 
power of these meanings. Even at the individual level, the 
reasons why a person may choose to take up self-tracking 
and the meanings she or he gives to the practice are 
socially enculturated. Self-tracking as a phenomenon has 
no meaning in itself. It is endowed with meaning by 

wider discourses on technology, selfhood, the body and 
social relations that circulate within the cultural context in 
which the practice is carried out. 

This paper seeks to offer a different perspective: one from 
a sociological lens, in which the broader social, cultural 
and political implications of self-tracking are identified 
and explored. This juxtaposition of the personal with the 
sociocultural aspects of computer informatics has yet to 
be fully explored and articulated in relation to self-
tracking. While self-tracking, in its very name and focus 
on the ‘self’ may appear to be an individualistic practice,
many self-trackers view themselves as part of community 
of trackers (Boesel, 2013; Lupton, 2013a, 2014b; Nafus 
and Sherman, 2014). They use social media, platforms 
designed for comparing and sharing personal data and 
sites such as the Quantified Self to engage with and learn 
from other self-trackers. Some attend meetups or 
conferences to meet face-to-face with other self-trackers 
and share their data and evaluations of the value of 
different techniques and devices for self-tracking.  

Self-tracking is moving from purely personal use to 
becoming incorporated into many areas of social life and 
social institutions. Educational institutions, medical and 
health promotion professionals and agencies and some 
workplaces have begun to encourage people to engage in 
self-tracking as part of health and fitness and worker 
productivity enhancement programs. Insurance 
companies are investigating ways of using the personal 
data from self-tracking to develop fine-grained risk 
assessment profiles for their clients and tailor 
individualised policies. Schools are introducing wearable 
tech and other self-monitoring devices in physical 
education lessons. As I have discussed elsewhere (Lupton 
2014b) five modes of self-tracking can be identified. 
These include private (for one’s own purposes only);
communal (sharing data with other self-trackers); pushed 
(encouraged by others); imposed (foisted upon people); 
and exploited (where people’s personal data are
repurposed for the use of others).  

There are many aspects of self-tracking cultures that can 
be analysed from a sociological perspective. The 
discussion in this paper draws on the findings of a larger 
project I am undertaking (culminating in a book) which 
involves a sociological analysis of self-tracking cultures 
using accounts of self-tracking in blog posts, websites, 
social media platforms such as LinkedIn, Facebook and 
Twitter and news reports and product reviews and 
descriptions. Rather than undertaking a comprehensive 
content analysis of such material, I use these sources as 
illustrative examples. I access this material using such 
strategies as regularly checking new posts on relevant 
websites, searching the Factiva international database, 
Twitter hashtags and conducting Google searches using 
the terms ‘self-tracking’, ‘quantified self’, ‘life logging’,
‘personal analytics’ and ‘personal informatics’ and 
subscribing to the Quantified Self LinkedIn interest group 
and the ‘What We are Reading’ weekly newsletter from
the Quantified Self website. 

78

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The current discussion extends my previous work on self-
tracking cultures (Lupton, 2012a, 2103a, 2013b, 2013c, 
2014a, 2014b). In what follows I focus on the following 
dimensions: self-optimisation and governing the self; 
entanglements of bodies, technologies and selves; the 
valorisation of data; data doubles; and social inequalities 
and self-tracking cultures. At this point in my research 
these dimensions are emerging as among the most 
integral in understanding self-tracking cultures. 

SELF-OPTIMISATION AND GOVERNING THE SELF 
The American television program PBS Newshour aired a 
news story on self-tracking on 28 September 2013 (PBS 
Newshour, 2013). The reporter begins with an interview 
with Bob Troia, an enthusiastic self-tracker who measures 
his sleep patterns, pulse, blood pressure, blood glucose, 
cognitive performance, heart rate, sweat levels, skin 
temperature and stress levels using a range of devices 
including his iPhone and wearable computing 
technologies. In the interview Troia says that he does all 
this as part of attempting to achieve a a healthy, enjoyable 
and productive life: ‘Personally, like, my goal is to
basically be – an optimal human being in every aspect of 
my life.’ 

Some further quotes from this news story included the 
following from another keen self-tracker: David Pogue, 
technology columnist for The New York Times. 

‘You want to be your best self. You want to put
your best foot forward.’ 

‘It’s absolutely narcissism. Or more healthfully,
ego. It’s studying yourself as an interesting topic
in ways that you couldn’t study yourself before,
I mean this is just giving you self-awareness into 
previously invisible aspects of your life.’ 

From the interviews with self-trackers quoted in this brief 
news report, a number of discourses that give meaning to 
self-tracking cultures are apparent. These include those 
about selfhood: the importance of self-awareness and 
self-improvement (the attempt to be ‘an optimal human
being’ and ‘your best self’) and also the role played by
self-interest (‘studying yourself as an interesting topic’).  

While there is constant reference among members of the 
Quantified Self movement to the ‘Quantified Self
community’, this community largely refers to sharing
personal data with each other, or learning from others’
data or self-tracking or data visualisation methods so that 
one’s own data project may be improved. According to
the Quantified Self Institute, a research body that is part 
of the Hanze University of Applied Sciences in the 
Netherlands, self-tracking ‘is a functionally “selfish”
activity, which is a result of a personal motivation. “Me
and my data”, that is the point of the Quantified Self’ (de 
Groot, 2014).  

There is a large literature on the ways in which self-
identity is enacted via digital technologies. However little 

attention has been paid to the ways in which the specific 
types of hardware and software that are used as part of 
contemporary self-tracking cultures draw on, reproduce, 
and in some cases reconfigure concepts of selfhood.  

One perspective that may be adopted uses the philosophy 
of Michel Foucault. Foucault’s (1988) writings on the 
practices and care of the self in western societies are 
pertinent to understanding self-tracking as a particular 
mode of governing the self. Foucault studied the various 
ways in which humans develop knowledge about 
themselves: economics, biology, psychiatry, medicine 
and penology. His objective was not to accept these 
knowledges at face value but to investigate the 
rationalities that underpin the techniques that people use 
to understand themselves. Foucault argues that one of the 
principal techniques for self-understanding is that which 
involves people engaging in the practices of selfhood in 
pursuit of their own interests. He argues that as a moral 
and ethical project individuals are required to take up 
certain practices to achieve happiness, wisdom, health 
and wellbeing. These practices are directed at their 
bodies, souls, thoughts, conduct and way of being.  

Several sociologists have taken up Foucauldian 
perspectives to argue that contemporary political 
rationales, or neoliberalism, promote self-responsibility as 
part of a governmental strategy that exerts ‘soft’ rather
than ‘hard’ authority. Citizens are encouraged to engage
in certain practices voluntarily as an effective and non-
coercive way of rendering them manageable and 
productive, assets rather than burdens to the social polity. 
Citizens act in their own self-interests but these self-
interests and outcomes are also aligned to the rationales 
and interests of the state (Lupton, 1995a; Rose, 1990, 
2007). 

From the Foucauldian perspective self-tracking may 
viewed as one of many heterogeneous strategies and 
discourses that position the ideal individual as a 
responsible citizen, willing and able to take care of her or 
his self-interest and welfare. Nikolas Rose refers to 
‘biological citizenship’ in his influential book The 
Politics of Life Itself (Rose, 2007). Extending this 
concept, one could also refer to ‘self-tracking citizenship’
as part of the panoply of strategies for the government of 
the self. Part of engaging in data collection as part of 
practices of selfhood is the idea that the self-knowledge 
that will eventuate will allow self-trackers to exert greater 
control over their destinies. The data and the knowledge 
contained therein will help them achieve better health, 
higher quality sleep, greater control over mood swings, 
improved management of chronic conditions, less stress, 
increased work productivity, better relationships with 
others and so on. 

This is all achieved voluntarily, as part of the quest for 
self-optimisation and as an often pleasurable and playful 
mode of self-surveillance (Lupton, 2012a, 2013a, 2013b, 
2014a; Nafus and Sherman, 2014; Ruckensein, 2014; 
Whitson, 2013). This perspective is evident in the words 
of self-tracking cyclist Andrea Parrish. On her blog 

79

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Parrish observed that she enjoys tracking her rides and 
her weight and calorie input and output because she views 
these activities as playful, thus enhancing her motivation: 

Tracking what I am doing and the effects those 
actions have appeals to the data-loving, game-
making, goal-oriented part of my brain. Tracking 
keeps me accountable to myself and allows me 
to turn what might otherwise be a chore into a 
challenge. (Parrish, 2012) 

Self-tracking can help people feel more in control of their 
lives (Li et al. 2010; Choe et al. 2014; Nafus and 
Sherman, 2014; Ruckenstein 2014). This can be 
important for people in a world in which fixed social 
structures and social ties have dissolved and far more 
choices for conducting one’s life are available. Other 
sociologists have identified the loss of traditional social 
structures (rigid gender roles, religion, the nuclear family, 
the workplace where one stays for a lifetime) as 
contributing to a sense that people are responsible for 
maximising their life chances in the context of 
uncertainty and unpredictability of contemporary life. 
People must choose among an array of options when 
deciding how to shape their lives, rather than conforming 
to established traditions. In doing so their life courses 
have become much more open, but also much more 
subject to threats and uncertainties. Their successes and 
failures are deemed to be their own responsibility as a 
result of their decisions and behaviours. 

In his work on risk society, Ulrich Beck (1992, 2009) 
describes the concept of self-reflexivity, which involves 
actively seeking information and making choices about 
one’s life. Zygmunt Bauman (2000) employs the term 
liquid modernity to describe similar aspects of 
contemporary western societies. According to Elliott 
(2013a, 2013b) one aspect of late modern societies is a 
new individualism, which involves the reinvention of the 
self and the body. He contends that the concept and 
practices of reinvention have become central to both 
private lives and organisations, and it is generally 
accepted that they are important endeavours. Reinvention 
is about transformation for the sake of personal growth, 
achievement, career success, health or wellbeing. This 
new individualism involves concentrating on the self to 
the exclusion of social groups, organisations or 
communities. 

Self-tracking, therefore, at least as it is undertaken as a 
private enterprise, may be understood the apotheosis of 
self-reflexivity in its intense focus on the self and using 
data about the self to make choices about future 
behaviours. As part of the new individualism, self-
reflection and critical self-examination are encouraged, 
viewed as ways of improving the self via therapeutic 
discourses and practices. Self-tracking practices are 
frequently represented as ways of achieving reinvention. 
They conform both to the notion of self-work and self-
improvement that are part of the reinvention paradigm, 
and to the new individualism in their focus on the self.  

ENTANGLEMENTS OF BODIES, TECHNOLOGIES AND 
SELVES 
Perspectives developed in the sociology of science and 
technology offer a further theoretical approach to think 
about the ways in which humans interact with their 
technologies. Such perspectives address such issues as the 
ontological nature of the human/technology interaction, 
the ways in which technologies are incorporated into 
concepts of embodiment and selfhood and how they 
extend or enhance these and how social relations are 
configured through, with and by technologies. 

In this literature it has been suggested that the blurring 
between the online and off-line self has become so 
advanced that it is now suggested that we can no longer 
distinguish between the two. Instead we are living in 
augmented reality (Jurgenson, 2012), and categories of 
flesh, identity and technology are porous and intermeshed 
(Elwell, 2014). For many commentators writing on these 
issues, the notion of the posthuman, or the idea that 
humans are inextricably intertwined with technologies is 
articulated. The concept of the cyborg, or the cybernetic 
organisation that is the human-machine assemblage, is 
also often used in this literature (Gray, 2002; Haraway, 
1991, 2008; Lupton, 1995b, 2015). In recent years some 
scholars have contended that we are living in a post-
cyborg world and have gone so far as to argue for 
technogenesis, the idea that humans and technologies 
such as digital devices are co-evolving (Hayles, 2008, 
2012). 

Sociologists of science and technology emphasise the 
multiplicity and constantly changing aspects of the 
human-technology relationship. They draw attention to 
the nonhuman actors that contribute to the hybrid 
assemblages that are configured when humans and 
technical devices come together. This perspective seeks 
to identify the large and complex network lies behind the 
digital devices that people use for such purposes as self-
tracking. Computer software and hardware developers, 
manufacturers and retailers, software coders, algorithms, 
computer servers and archives, the computing cloud, 
websites, platforms and social media sites are all part of 
the network of actors that configure and enact the self-
tracking assemblage. As Williams (2013: no page number 
given) notes, an analysis of self-tracking should 
‘incorporate and question how our personhood and our
work is increasingly being defined not just by ourselves, 
but by a complex of others … that are building on our
desire to optimize our selves’. 

Humans have always used material objects as 
technologies. As these technologies have transmuted into 
digital forms, particularly into smaller and more easily 
wearable and even ingestible forms (in the case of digital 
tablets), it becomes less obvious where the body ends and 
the technology begins. This blurring of boundaries is 
most overtly the case of such technologies as heart pace-
makers, insulin pumps and cochlear implants, all of 
which are inserted into the body in unobtrusive ways. But 
it is also now an element of the types of digital 
technologies that we use for communication, such as 

80

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
smartphones, or for self-tracking of bodily functions and 
activities, such as armbands, clothing or watches 
embedded with sensors. We not only wear self-tracking 
technologies but we move around in spaces, both public 
and private, that are equipped with sensors for monitoring 
human bodies. Our bodies’ location is digitised by a
plethora of sensor-based technologies: either our own or 
those that are embedded in the built environment. Our 
knowledges of our bodies, therefore, are increasingly 
digitised and rendered into data (Lupton, 2015). 

This is not to say, however, that self-trackers necessarily 
experience monitoring devices as part of themselves, or 
that they do not find these technologies sometimes 
annoying or irritating. The use of tracking devices for 
collecting biometric data can make people even more 
aware of their fleshly bodies by constantly alerting to 
their capacities and limitations, and this may be 
discomforting (Buse, 2010; Freund, 2004; Lupton, 2012a; 
Ruckenstein, 2014). As Freund (2004) so vividly put it, 
there may be ‘seams in the cyborg’.  

Some people find wearable self-tracking devices not 
fashionable enough, or not water-proof enough, or too 
clunky or heavy, or not comfortable enough to wear, or 
find that they get destroyed in the washing machine when 
the user forgets to remove them from their clothing. For 
example, Ruckenstein’s (2014) interviews with Finnish
users of heart-rate and physical activity digital monitors 
found that some remarked on their consciousness of the 
devices. As one woman commented, ‘Last night, I noticed
that the measuring equipment suddenly started physically 
annoying me quite a lot. I would have liked to have 
ripped if off, even if just for the night’ (2014: 75). 

Designer Jennifer Darmour (2013) has argued that the 
aesthetic dimensions of wearable technologies have been 
little addressed. If these technologies remain too obvious, 
she argues, ‘bolting’ these devices to our bodies (an 
unlikely Frankenstein metaphor) and therefore obviously 
proclaiming ourselves as cyborgs will ‘distract, disrupt,
and ultimately disengage us from others, ultimately 
degrading our human experience’ (2013: no page number 
given). Darmour asserts that these objects need to be 
designed more carefully so that they may be ‘seamlessly’
integrated into the ‘fabric of our lives’ (2013: no page 
number given). Her suggested ways of doing this include 
making self-tracking devices look more beautiful, like 
jewellery (broaches, necklaces, bracelets, rings), 
incorporating them into fashionable garments, making 
them peripheral and making them meaningful: and using 
colours or vibrations rather than numbers to display data 
readings from these devices. 

On her blog, Carol Torgan (2012), a health strategist and 
educator, has remarked upon the emotions that wearing 
digital self-tracking devices may provoke in people. She 
notes that putting on a self-tracking device makes some 
people feel athletic, some fashionable, others fat and self-
conscious about their bodies. Others feel safer and 
develop a greater sense of security about having their 
health monitored by these devices. Here again it was 

observed that the design of the device – its ‘look’, its
conspicuousness or lack thereof  – may be integral to how 
people feel when they wear it. Design features, emotions, 
bodies, selves and data are entangled in the digitised self-
tracking experience. 

THE VALORISATION OF DATA 
Data is a keyword in discourses on self-tracking. The aim 
of the Quantified Self movement, suggest its inventors 
Gary Wolf and Kevin Kelly on their website, ‘is to help
people get meaning out of their personal data’ (About the 
Quantified Self, 2014). In his seminal article on the 
quantified self for The New York Times, Wolf (2010) 
asserts that: ‘If you want to replace the vagaries of 
intuition with something more reliable, you first need to 
gather data. Once you know the facts, you can live by 
them.’ He then expounds on the virtues of numbers: 

We tolerate the pathologies of quantification — 
a dry, abstract, mechanical type of knowledge — 
because the results are so powerful. Numbering 
things allows tests, comparisons, experiments. 
Numbers make problems less resonant 
emotionally but more tractable intellectually. In 
science, in business and in the more reasonable 
sectors of government, numbers have won fair 
and square. 

Another example of the valorisation of data is the term 
‘the data-driven lifestyle’. This was used as the headline
for Wolf’s The New York Times article. It has been 
employed several times in the popular media since that 
article was published, including in a recent article about 
Chris Dancy, an American who has used 700 gadgets, 
sensors, apps and other software to collect data about his 
body and his habits (Pullar-Strecker, 2014).  

The statistical aspect of the practice of self-tracking – the 
ability to produce quantifiable information measuring 
aspects of one’s life – is integral to the approach. It is 
assumed that the production of such data is the best way 
of assessing and representing the value of one’s life and
that better ‘self-knowledge’ will result. This perspective
recurs in popular media accounts and posts on websites 
such as the Quantified Self, where the motto is ‘self
knowledge through numbers’.  

In an online article, Duncan Watts, a social scientist at 
Microsoft Research and long-term self-tracker, argues for 
the importance of collecting personal data by contrasting 
instinct, tradition and received wisdom with the more 
reliable evidence provided by self-tracking data: 

“If you had to choose between a world in which
you do everything based on instinct, tradition or 
some vague, received wisdom, or you do 
something based on evidence, I would say the 
latter is the way to go,” … The challenge is
coming up with the proper interpretation of the 
data, he said. (quoted in Feiler, 2014: no page 
number given) 

81

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
As Watt’s words suggest, the lure of ‘numbers’ is that
they appear scientifically neutral and exact compared to 
the less reliable data that one’s instincts or physical
sensations may generate. The body/self as it is produced 
through self-tracking, therefore, is both subject and 
product of scientific measurement and interpretation.  

The ideal for many self-trackers is technologies that 
automatically sense and collect data on their lives without 
needing direct intervention from users. Blumtritt (2014: 
no page number given), for example, has expressed his 
contemplations on the future of the quanitified self thus: 
‘Data will become integral with our sensory, biological 
self. And as we get more and more connected, our feeling 
of being tied into one body will also fade, as we become 
data creatures, bodiless, angelized’. 

The notion that digital self-tracking devices render visible 
elements of one’s self and body that are not otherwise
perceptible is also expressed in many accounts of self-
tracking. In the Newshour report referred to earlier, 
interviewee Bob Troia talks about checking his 
smartphone app to see how stressed he is: ‘I can look 
down at my phone at any point in the day and see, kind 
of, how stressed I am’. Another interviewee for this 
report, David Pogue, discusses the awareness that may be 
gained from self-tracking ‘into previously invisible
aspects of your life’. 

According to Apple’s announcement of its new Health
app, ‘“How are you?” now has a really accurate answer
… Heart rate, calories burned, blood sugar, cholesterol — 
your health and fitness apps are great at collecting all that 
data. The new Health app puts that data in one place, 
accessible with a tap, giving you a clear and current 
overview of your health’. As with many other health-
related self-tracking apps the Health app provides 
‘dashboards’ that visualise body data such as sleep
patterns and calories burned. It is these data, as presented 
in this way, which are portrayed as denoting what ‘health’
means. As this description suggests, understanding and 
articulating how healthy one feels is more accurate if 
digital data are employed rather than relying on one’s
subjective sense of wellbeing. 

Related to the concept of the posthuman is the idea that 
human bodies and selves are now experienced and 
produced as information systems (Haraway, 1991; 
Hayles, 2012). The body becomes represented as a 
repository of identifiable, storable and processable data, 
constituted by data flows and circulations. Indeed the 
body and the data it represents become central to concepts 
of identity. In many accounts of self-tracking the human 
body is represented as a chaotic producer of masses of 
data that need to be disciplined by monitoring, measuring 
and management. It is not until the data are recorded and 
produced into some kind of visual form that they can be 
interpreted, and then understood and acted upon. While 
the body may be represented as a computerised 
information system, therefore, in these types of 
discussions such a system is flawed compared with literal 
computerised technologies. The human computer, in its 

inevitably fleshly humanness, can never achieve the 
capabilities offered by real digitised technologies. 
Humans require the assistance of machines to extend their 
capabilities and provide accuracy and enhanced 
interpretation and memory of information. 

DATA DOUBLES 
The concept of data doubles is a useful way to think about 
these entanglements of bodies, technologies and selves in 
digital self-tracking. Data doubles are configured when 
digital data are collected on individuals, serving to 
configure a certain representation of a person (Haggerty 
and Ericson, 2000). They have their own social lives and 
materiality, quite apart from the fleshy bodies from which 
they are developed.  

Self-trackers are drawing on the capacities of new 
technologies to generate increasing quantities and diverse 
forms of information about their bodies and selves. While 
self-tracking was once achieved via such practices as 
journal keeping or writing down numbers, it was difficult 
to analyse these data for their patterns. Digitised data 
devices and apps and other software provide the 
opportunity to access and analyse the numbers efficiently 
and quickly. Different data sets may now be combined to 
identify patterns in ways that were not achievable in the 
past.  

The diversity of approaches to self-tracking results in a 
range of data doubles being configured on the body and 
self. The physical activity monitor produces some forms 
of data, as does the productivity app or the mood tracker, 
for example. Each configures a different and constantly 
changing data double of the user, and may intersect or 
not. Indeed the difficulty now faced by self-trackers is the 
overwhelming mass of data that they may have to deal 
with, given the infinite number of ways in which data sets 
may be combined with the aim of generating insights (Li 
et al., 2011; Choe et al., 2014; Lupton, 2014b).  

Data doubles representing aspects of the body and self are 
continually re-enacted and reconfigured. The physical 
activity tracking device produces some forms of data that 
may or may not be acted on by the user, as does the 
productivity app or the mood tracker, for example. Each 
configures a different and constantly changing data 
double of the user (Lupton, 2013c, 2014b; Ruckenstein, 
2014). Central to the process of self-tracking, therefore, is 
the concept of change. Data doubles never stand still. As 
soon as they are generated they are subject to change 
when more data are added. Data doubles are constantly 
open to reconfiguration and hence re-interpretation.  

Data doubles are also recursive and reflexive. Self-
trackers reflect upon their data and seek to make sense of 
them. A feedback loop is established, in which personal 
data are produced from digital technologies which then 
are used by the individual to assess her or his activities 
and behaviour and modify them accordingly (Lupton, 
2012a, 2013a, 2014a, 2014b; Ruckenstein, 2014; 
Whitson, 2013). Data doubles, therefore, are both 

82

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
constituted by the body and self and in turn serve to re-
constitute the body and self.  

One of the most interesting accounts of self-tracking 
using digital devices is an autoethnographic account by 
Kaiton Williams, a technologist and designer. Williams 
notes that he found that self-tracking using digital devices 
was effective. He employed smartphone apps to track his 
weight loss, diet and exercise. However while he was 
pleased to lose weight, he found that non-weight-related 
aspects of his life began to be re-interpreted through the 
lens of these devices. He disliked the perspective on his 
body that the data derived from self-tracking gave him: 

I do not enjoy contemplating my self as blood 
and sinews and electrical signals … I might have
preferred to accomplish my self transformation 
within broader measures, and I still long for that; 
to comprehend my body in longer and longer 
scales: seasons instead of hours, some other, 
coarser, property than calories. (Williams, 2013: 
no page number given) 

Williams goes on to discuss how rendering his life more 
calculable using tracking apps changed his eating habits 
to fit the technical requirements of the apps. ‘I prioritized
certain foods and recipes, and avoided others to work best 
within the capabilities of the food database’. He notes that
he began to trust the digital data over his own physical 
sensations, and that the data also began to shape how he 
felt: 

We (the Apps and I) had co-constructed a digital 
model of my self, and here I was, managing 
myself, it seems, by proxy. The feedback from 
that digital model often took precedence over 
how I physically felt. When I didn’t eat ‘enough’
protein I felt weaker, and when I had too much 
sugar I felt fatter. These were delayed reactions; 
a re-reading of my body from the model. I’ve yet
to decide: is this model pushing me closer in 
contact or further away from my self and my 
world?  

Some of the self-tracking interviewees in Nafus and 
Sherman’s study (2014) also articulated an interesting 
negotiation between making sense of the data doubles 
that their devices were producing in the light of their own 
physical interpretations of their bodies. As these 
comments suggest, an important dimension of the lived 
experience of self-tracking is the ambivalence people may 
feel about investing their trust in the numbers and altering 
their perceptions to fit the demands of the technologies 
they use. 

SOCIAL INEQUALITIES AND SELF-TRACKING 
CULTURES 
Little attention is paid either in self-tracking cultures or in 
the human-computer interaction literature to the ways in 
which such social factors as gender, place of residence, 
social class, race or ethnicity serve to shape people’s
opportunities and life chances. Instead the self is 

understood as an atomised individual, shaped by personal 
life experiences and empowered to manipulate her or his 
destiny by acquiring self-knowledge and acting rationally 
upon this knowledge.  

As I noted earlier, educational institutions, healthcare and 
health promotion professionals and agencies and 
workplaces have begun to encourage people to engage in 
self-tracking, and therefore are also participating as actors 
in self-tracking cultures. There are major social justice 
issues that are emerging from the enrolment of such 
agencies and institutions into self-tracking. Failure to 
participate in wellness programs at work may lead to 
higher health insurance premiums, as is happening in 
some workplaces in the United States where employers 
are responsible for covering healthcare costs for their 
employees and therefore have a vested interest in their 
employees’ health (Olson, 2014). Wearable technology 
manufacturers are brokering deals with employers and 
insurance companies to sell their fitness and activity 
trackers and data analytics software as part of these 
wellness programs. Employees must give their consent to 
wearing the devices and allowing employers to view their 
activity data. However when incentives such as lower 
health insurance premiums are offered, such consent 
becomes less voluntary. So too, wearing tracking devices 
may be required as part of workers’ productivity
monitoring and linked to pay and promotion opportunities 
(Lohr, 2014).  

Under these types of schemes, surveillance using self-
tracking devices becomes required of the user by others. 
While these devices still monitor and measure personal 
data on an individual basis, they are no longer 
participating in private self-tracking but rather responding 
to pushed or imposed self-tracking (Lupton, 2012a, 
2013b, 2013c; Whitson, 2013). Indeed it can be difficult 
in some of these instances to distinguish between pushed 
and imposed self-tracking, particularly when financial 
incentives or penalties or employment prospects are 
implicated. 

Self-tracking discourses and cultures can be moralistic 
and judgemental, building on wider and long-established 
ideas about personal responsibility for good health, 
physical fitness and productivity (Lupton, 1995a, 2012a, 
2012b, 2013b). When notions of health, wellbeing and 
productivity are produced via data drawn from self-
monitoring, the social determinants of these attributes are 
obscured. Illness, emotional distress, lack of happiness or 
lack of achievement in the workplace become represented 
primarily as failures of individual self-control or 
efficiency, and therefore as requiring greater or more 
effective efforts, including perhaps increased intensity of 
self-tracking regimens, to produce a ‘better self’.  

This is perhaps most evident in the ways in which self-
tracking practices have been taken up in the medical and 
public health domains, where self-management of 
individuals’ health and an emphasis on personal
responsibility for taking steps to prevent disease and early 
death have long featured (Lupton, 1995a). Concepts of 

83

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
‘patient engagement’ now frequently include reference to
the importance of patients undertaking self-monitoring 
and self-care, often using digitised devices (Lupton, 
2013b). Writers in the preventive medicine and health 
promotion literatures have also begun to refer to the 
importance of self-tracking bodily activities as a way of 
preventing disease that is believed to be self-imposed 
(see, for example, Swan, 2012). Those people who 
participate as self-tracking citizens are able to 
demonstrate their adherence to these ideals, while those 
who do not may be regarded as falling short of achieving 
their ‘best selves’. 

These positions on self-tracking again position people as 
ideally self-managing and possessing enough knowledge 
and self-control to successfully participate in such 
schemes and gain benefits from them. Little 
acknowledgement is made of the relative influence of 
socioeconomic advantage on people’s opportunities to
engage in self-tracking and the continuing social 
inequalities that limit people’s digital technology use.
People who possess socioeconomic privilege are able to 
exert far more control over their lives than the 
disadvantaged. Many studies have shown that older 
people, those with less education, lower incomes, people 
with disabilities and chronic health problems and people 
living in rural and remote areas have less access to and 
skills in using digital technologies (Broadbent and 
Papadopoulos, 2013; Hargittai and Hinnant, 2008; 
Olphert and Damodaran, 2013). Yet in the overwhelming 
focus on the atomised, self-autonomous individual that 
pervades self-tracking cultures, the issues of 
socioeconomic disadvantage and the social determinants 
that shape people’s willingness or capacity to engage in
self-tracking are ignored. 

CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper I have discussed the discourses that have 
come together to give meaning to self-tracking cultures. I 
have argued that self-tracking cultures have emerged in 
the context of the current cultural moment of the belief 
that data are superior forms of knowledge, combined with 
the affordances of contemporary digital technologies that 
allow individuals to produce large masses of data about 
themselves. These discourses and practices intersect with 
others concerning individualisation, reinvention, the 
neoliberalist privileging of self-responsibility and the 
importance of attaining knowledge about the self as part 
of working upon and improving the self.  

I have also highlighted the importance of identifying the 
complexity of the multitude of human and nonhuman 
actors that work together to configure self-tracking 
assemblages. Further investigation is required of how 
these interactions operate and the ways in which people 
construct, make sense of and negotiate the data doubles 
that are generated by self-tracking assemblages. So too 
the ways in which the incorporation of the self-tracking 
ethos and practices into commercial and governmental 
enterprises is operating is a topic worthy of more detailed 
examination. 

Finally, I have contended that despite the focus on the 
individual that is commonly articulated in self-tracking 
cultures, there are wider political and social justice 
implications. The self-impelled and voluntary aspects of 
self-tracking (what I term ‘private self-tracking’) are 
becoming harnessed to broader collective commercial, 
economic or social imperatives. While some elements of 
self-interest may still operate, people may not always 
have full choice over whether or not they engage in self-
tracking and may be coerced into taking part.  

In a social context in which self-management for 
optimising one’s life is idealised and rewarded, those who
fail to do so are disadvantaged both in terms of financial 
costs and in attracting moral judgements from others. 
Acknowledging the role of cultural meanings and social 
structural factors in shaping human lives and fortunes is a 
key sociological perspective that could be productively 
incorporated into further research on self-tracking and the 
design of future prototypes of self-tracking devices. 

REFERENCES 
About the Quantified Self. Quantified Self. Available at  
http://quantifiedself.com/about,  accessed 16 June 2014. 

Bauman, Z. Liquid Modernity. Cambridge: Polity Press, 
2000. 

Beck, U. Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. 
London: Sage, 1992. 

Beck, U. World at Risk Cambridge: Polity, 2009. 

Bentley, F., Tollmar, K., Stephenson, P., Levy, L., Jones, 
B., Robertson, S., Price, E., Catrambone, R. and Wilson, 
J. Health Mashups: presenting statistical patterns between 
wellbeing data and context in natural language to promote 
behavior change. ACM Transactions on Computer-
Human Interaction 20, 5 (2013), 1-27. 

Blumtritt, J. Organizing a system of 10 billion people. 
Datarella. Published 29 April 2014. Available at 
http://datarella.com/organizing-a-system-of-10-billion-
people, accessed 10 May 2014. 

Boesel, W.E. What is the quantified self now? 
Cyborgology. Published 22 May 2013. Available at 
http://thesocietypages.org/cyborgology/2013/05/22/what-
is-the-quantified-self-now/#more-15717, accessed 11 
August 2013. 

Broadbent, R. and Papadopoulos, T. Bridging the digital 
divide - an Australian story.  Behaviour & Information 
Technology 32, 1 (2013), 4-13. 

Buse, C.E. E-scaping the ageing body? Computer 
technologies and embodiment in later life. Ageing & 
Society, 30, 6 (2010), 987-1009. 

Choe, E.K., Lee, N.B., Lee, B., Pratt, W. and Kientz, J.A. 
Understanding  quantified-selfers'  practices  in  collecting 
and  exploring  personal  data.  In  Proc.  CHI  2014,  ACM 
Press (2014), 1143-1152. 

Darmour,  J.  3  ways  to  make  wearable  tech  actually 
wearable.  Co.Design.  Published  15  March  2013. 

84

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Available  at  http://www fastcodesign.com/1672107/3-
ways-to-make-wearable-tech-actually-
wearable?goback=%2Egde 2181454 member 22344923
4, accessed 20 March 2013. 

de  Groot,  M.  Quantified  Self,  Quantified  Us,  Quantified 
Other.  Quantified  Self  Institute.  Published  15  January 
2014.  Available  at  http://www.qsinstitute.org/?p=2048, 
accessed 12 June 2014. 

Elliott, A. The theory of new individualism', in R. 
Tafarodi (ed.), Subjectivity in the Twenty-First Century: 
Psychological, Sociological, and Political Perspectives, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (2013a), 190-
209. 

Elliott, A. Reinvention. London: Routledge, 2013b. 

Elwell, J.S. The transmediated self: Life between the 
digital and the analog', Convergence, 20, 2 (2014), 233-
49. 

Epstein, D.A., Cordeiro, F., Bales, E., Fogarty, J. and 
Munson, S.A. (2014) Taming data complexity in lifelogs: 
Exploring visual cuts of personal informatics data. Proc. 
DIS 2014, ACM Press (2014). 

Fan, C., Forlizzi, J. and Dey, A. A spark of activity: 
exploring informative art as visualization for physical 
activity. Ubicomp 2012, ACM Press (2012), 81-84. 

Feiler, B. The united states of metrics. The New York 
Times. Published 16 May 2014. Available at 
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/18/fashion/the-united-
states-of-metrics.html? r=3, accessed 16 June 2014. 

Fichman, P. & Rosenbaum, H. (eds.) Social Informatics: 
Past, Present and Future. Newcastle upon Tyne: 
Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2014. 

Foucault, M. Technologies of the self, in L. Martin, H. 
Gutman, & P. Hutton (eds), Technologies of the Self: A 
Seminar with Michel Foucault, London: Tavistock 
(1988), 16-49. 

Freund, P. Civilised bodies redux: seams in the cyborg. 
Social Theory & Health, 2, 3 (2004),  273-289. 

Hayles, N.K.  How We Think: Digital Media and 
Contemporary Technogenesis. Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press, 2012. 

Jurgenson, N. When atoms meet bits: social media, the 
mobile web and augmented revolution. Future Internet, 4, 
1 (2012), 83-91. 

Kamal, N., Fels, S. and Ho, K. Online social networks for 
personal informatics to promote positive health behavior. 
In Proc. SIGMM Workshop on Social Media 2010, ACM 
Press (2010), 47-52. 

Khot, R., Mueller, F. and Hjorth, L. SweatAtoms: 
materializing physical activity. In Proc. IE 2013, ACM 
Press (2013), 1-7. 

Khovanskaya, V., Baumer, E.P., Cosley, D., Voida, S. 
and Gay, G. Everybody knows what you're doing: a 
critical design approach to personal informatics. In Proc. 
SIGCHI 2013, ACM Press (2013), 3403-3412. 

Li, I., Dey, A., and Forlizzi, J. A stage-based model of 
personal informatics systems. In  Proc. SIGCHI 2010, 
ACM Press (2010), 557-66. 

Li, I., Dey, A.K., and Forlizzi, J. Understanding my data, 
myself: supporting self-reflection with ubicomp 
technologies. In Proc. UbiComp 2011, ACM Press 
(2011), 405-14. 

Lohr, S. Unblinking eyes track employees. The New York 
Times. Published 21 June 2014. Available at 
http://www nytimes.com/2014/06/22/technology/workpla
ce-surveillance-sees-good-and-
bad html?module=Search&mabReward=relbias%3Ar& r
=1, accessed 23 June 2014. 

Lupton, D. The Imperative of Health: Public Health and 
the Regulated Body. London: Sage, 1995a. 

Lupton, D. The embodied computer/user.  Body & 
Society, 1, 3-4 (1995b), 97-112. 

Lupton, D. M-health and health promotion: the digital 
cyborg and surveillance society. Social Theory & Health 
10, 3 (2012a), 229-44. 

Gray, C. Cyborg Citizen: Politics in the Posthuman Age 
New York: Routledge, 2002. 

Lupton, D.  Medicine as Culture: Illness, Disease and the 
Body, 3rd edition. London: Sage, 2012b. 

Haggerty, K. & Ericson, R. The surveillant assemblage. 
British Journal of Sociology 51, 4 (2000), 605-22. 

Lupton, D. Understanding the human machine. IEEE 
Technology & Society Magazine 32, 4 (2013a), 25-30. 

Haraway, D.  Simians, Cyborgs and Women: the 
Reinvention of Nature. London: Free Association Press, 
1991. 

Lupton, D. The digitally engaged patient: Self-monitoring 
and self-care in the digital health era. Social Theory & 
Health 11, 3 (2013b), 256-70. 

Haraway, D. When Species Meet. Minneapolis: The 
University of Minnesota Press, 2008. 

Hargittai, E. & Hinnant, A. Digital inequality: differences 
in young adults' use of the Internet. Communication 
Research 35, 5, (2008), 602-621. 

Hayles, N.K. How We Became Posthuman: Virtual 
Bodies in Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics. 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 2008. 

Lupton, D. Quantifying the body: Monitoring and 
measuring health in the age of mHealth technologies. 
Critical Public Health 23, 4 (2013c), 393-403. 

Lupton, D. Quantified sex: a critical analysis of sexual 
and reproductive self-tracking using apps. Culture, 
Health & Sexuality, online first (2014a), doi: 
10.1080/13691058.2014.920528. 

Lupton, D. Self-tracking modes: reflexive self-monitoring 
Imminent 
and  data  practices.  Paper  presented  at 

85

Citizenships:  Personhood  and  Identity  Politics  in  the 
Informatic  Age,  Canberra,  27  August  2014.  Available  at 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=2483549, accessed 28 September 
2014.  

Purpura, S., Schwanda, V., Williams, K., Stubler, W. and 
Sengers, P. Fit4life: the design of a persuasive technology 
promoting healthy behavior and ideal weight. In Proc. 
SIGCHI 2011, ACM Press (2011), 423-32. 

Lupton, D. Digital Sociology. London: Routledge, 2015. 

MacLeod, H., Tang, A., and Carpendale, S. Personal 
informatics in chronic illness management.  In Proc. GI 
2013, 149-56. 

Nafus, D. and Sherman, J. This one does not go up to 11: 
the Quantified Self movement as an alternative data 
practice. International Journal of Communication, 8 
(2014), 1784-1794. 

Olphert, W. and Damodaran, L. Older people and digital 
disengagement: a fourth digital divide?’ Gerontology, 59, 
6 (2013), 564-570. 

Olson, P. Get ready for wearable tech to plug into health 
insurance. Forbes. Published 19 June 2014. Available at 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/parmyolson/2014/06/19/wea
rable-tech-health-insurance/, accessed 21 June 2014. 

PBS Newshour. The quantified self: data gone wild? PBS 
Newshour. Published 13 October 2013. Available at 
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/science/july-
dec13/quantifiedself 09-28 html, accessed 6 January 
2014. 

Parrish, A. (2012) Gamification keeps me going (aka I'm 
the self-tracking type). Bikestyle. No publication date 
provided. Available at 
http://bikestylespokane.com/2012/06/09/gamification-
keeps-me-going-aka-im-the-self-tracking-type-an-andrea-
post/, accessed 28 June 2014. 

Personal informatics tools. Personal Informatics. 
Available at http://www.personalinformatics.org/tools/, 
accessed 14 June 2014. 

Pullar-Strecker, T.  Personal informatics trends tracked. 
Stuff.co.nz. Published 17 April 2014. Available at 
http://www.stuff.co.nz/business/industries/9950896/Perso
nal-informatics-trends-tracked, accessed 15 June 2014. 

Quantified Self guide to self-tracking tools. Quantified 
Self. Available at 
http://quantifiedself.com/guide/tools?sort=reviews&pg=1, 
accessed 10 June 2014. 

Rooksby, J., Rost, M., Morrison, A., and Chalmers, M.C. 
Personal tracking as lived informatics. In Proc. CHI 2014. 
ACM Press (2014), 1163-1172. 

Rose, N. Governing the Soul: The Shaping of the Private 
Self. London: Routledge, 1990. 

Rose, N. The Politics of Life Itself. Biomedicine, Power, 
and Subjectivity in the Twenty-First Century. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007. 

Ruckenstein, M. Visualized and interacted life: Personal 
analytics and engagements with data doubles. Societies, 
4, 1 (2014), 68-84. 

Thieme, A., Comber, R., Miebach, J., Weeden, J., 
Kraemer, N., Lawson, S. and Olivier, P. We've bin 
watching you: designing for reflection and social 
persuasion to promote sustainable lifestyles. In Proc. 
SIGCHI 2012, ACM Press (2012), 2337-2346. 

Torgan, C. A shiny new activity tracker: technology as 
talisman? Kinetics. Available at 
http://www.caroltorgan.com/shine-activity-tracker/, 
accessed 20 April 2013. 

Whitson, J. (2013) Gaming the quantified self. 
Surveillance & Society 11, 1/2 (2013), 163-176. 

Williams, K. The weight of things lost: self-knowledge 
and personal informatics. Paper presented at CHI 2013. 

Wolf, G. The data-driven life. The New York Times. 
Published 28 April 2010. Available at 
http://www nytimes.com/2010/05/02/magazine/02self-
measurement-t html?pagewanted=all& r=0, accessed 22 
February 2013. 

86

 
 
 
 
 
