Sensor Requirements for Activity Recognition 
on Smart Watches 
Marian Haescher 
University of Rostock 
Albert-Einstein-Straße 22 
18059 Rostock, Germany 
marian.haescher@ 
uni-rostock.de 

Matthias Vahl 
Fraunhofer IGD 
Joachim-Jungius-Str. 11 
18059 Rostock, Germany 
matthias.vahl@ 
igd-r.fraunhofer.de 

Gerald Bieber 
Fraunhofer IGD 
Joachim-Jungius-Str. 11 
18059 Rostock, Germany 
gerald.bieber@ 
igd-r.fraunhofer.de 

ABSTRACT 
The  new  generation  of  watches  is  smart.  Smart  watches  are 
connected  to  the  internet  and  provide  sensor  functionality  that 
allows  an  enhanced  human-computer-interaction.  Smart  watches 
provide  a  gesture  interaction  and  a  permanent  monitoring  of 
physical  activities.  In  comparison  to  other  electronic  home 
consumer devices with integrated sensors, Smart watches provide 
monitoring data for 24h per day, many watches are water resistant 
and can be worn constantly. The integrated sensors are varying in 
performance and are not intended to distinguish between different 
states  of  activity  and  inactivity.  This  paper  reports  on  identified 
requirements on sensors of smart watches for detection of activity, 
inactivity as  well as sleep detection. Hereby a new  measurement 
quantity  is  introduced  and  applications of  heart  beat detection  or 
wearing situation are presented.   

Categories and Subject Descriptors 
H.5.2 [User Interfaces]: Information Interfaces and Presentation 
I.5.2 [Design Methodology]: Pattern Recognition 
J.3 [Life and Medical Sciences] 

General Terms 
Mobile  Computing,  algorithms,  smart  watch,  user  interfaces, 
quantify self. 

Keywords 
Activity  Monitoring,  inactivity,  acceleration,  sensor,  recognition, 
wrist, watch, smart, sleep. 

INTRODUCTION 

1. 
The ongoing trend of not wearing a watch because of an available 
phone  with  clock  functionality  seems  to  be  stopped.  The  origin 
functionality of watches, just to display the time, is tremendously 
smart  watches. 
the  new  generation  of 
enhanced  by 

Smart  watches  are  designed  to  display  various  messages  such  as 
SMS,  RSS-feeds,  Emails,  or  Facebook  messages.  For  interaction 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for  components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific  permission  and/or  a 
from 
Permissions@acm.org.  
PETRA 
Copyright 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2504335.2504407 

'13,  May  29  -  31  2013,  Island  of  Rhodes,  Greece 
978-1-4503-1973-7/13/05…$15.00. 

fee.  Request  permissions 

ACM 

2013 

purposes,  smart  watches  provide  additional  sensor  functionality 
that  might  be  used  for  third  party  application  providers.  Hereby 
mainly  sport  or  wellness  applications  are  in  focus  of  the 
manufactures. Because of the smart watch´s sensor functionality, 
the  device  enables  new  and  innovative  applications  that  expand 
the  original  application  field.  The  smart  watches  allow  a 
permanent  monitoring  of  the  activities  of  the  user.  The  acquired 
information  on  the  physical  activity  of  a  person  can  be  used  for 
various purposes, such as wellness, safety,  various psychological 
identifier (degree of attention), or detection of micro-activities in 
an overall state of inactivity. 

For  activity  and  inactivity  recognition  by  smart  watches  it  is 
necessary  to  be  aware  of  capabilities  of  the  sensors.  This  paper 
introduces the current work of sensor technology and describes a 
generic  identifier  of  the  performance  of  the  acceleration  sensing 
functionality  of  the  smart  watches.  The  paper  closes  with  a 
summary and an outlook of the future work in the area of activity 
recognition on smart watches. 

RELATED WORK 
Smart Watch  

2. 
2.1 
In  the  90´s,  some  watches  [1]  were  designed  with  an  integrated 
light sensor that enabled a connection to a PC. Hereby data were 
transferred  to  optical  information  on  the  monitor  of  the  PC  and 
could be received by a light sensor of the watch (e.g. Timex data-
link).  Nowadays,  the  connectivity  has  been  realized  by  wireless 
communication, e.g. Bluetooth or propriety protocols. The current 
models  of  smart  watches  are  connected  via  Bluetooth  to  a  smart 
phone. Because the watch is located at the wrist, a permanent look 
on  the  micro  display  of  the  watch  is  possible.  The  main 
application  of  smart  watches  is  to  display  messages  of  services 
like Facebook, SMS, RSS or incoming calls. One of the most used 
sensors  of  a  smart  watch  is  an  acceleration  sensor  to  support 
fitness and wellness applications with pedometer functionality.  

The  smart  watch  idea  provides  two  general  concepts.  The  first 
concept of smart watches is the autarkical watch. The smart watch 
provides  computational  power.  Hereby  a  wireless  connection  to 
the  internet  or  phone  is  only  needed  for  data  synchronization 
purposes. This concept allows sensor data processing directly on 
the watch. 

The  second  concept  of  smart  watches  is  the  idea  of  a  dedicated 
terminal. Each event, e.g. pressing a button, screen touch event, or 
sensor readout has to be transmitted to a hub, the smart phone. On 
the phone, the data will be processed and events will be sent back 
to  the  watch  wirelessly.  Hereby  the  phone  might  transmit  the 
vibration  event  or  the  screen  content.  The  watch  needs  no  extra 
computational  power  which  helps  saving  battery  energy.  If 

 
 
 
Activity Recognition  

acceleration data are to be read out permanently (e.g. for activity 
recognition) the  transmission  needs  significant  more  energy  than 
an onboard data processing would consume. 
2.2 
The  integrated  acceleration  sensor  of  a  smart  watch  enables  the 
feature of physical activity recognition. Because of the location of 
the watch, the integrated sensor measures the acceleration force of 
the wrist.  The  wrist is not the ideal location for physical activity 
recognition in comparison to the hip. If the user is shaking the hip, 
the acceleration data are a good indicator that the whole body is in 
motion.  In  [2],  [3]  is  shown  that  the  pattern  of  a  hip  movement 
correlates  to  the  basic  activities  such  as  walking,  cycling,  car 
driving or jogging.  

The  wrist  movements  are  very  complex  and  are  significantly 
different to the hip movements. Nevertheless Polar could proof by 
AW200  that  easy  activity  recognition  for  walking  and  different 
states of running is possible on a commercial product [4]. Hereby 
an  acceleration  and  air  pressure  sensor  were  integrated  into  the 
watch.  The  research  project  eWatch  [5]  designed  an  activity 
monitoring  system  that  uses  additional  sensors,  e.g.  light  and 
audio.  WristQue  by  MIT,  USA  [6]  is  a  research  prototype  with 
integrated location sensor, temperature and humidity. The focus of 
InfoPulse [7] is to act as a handsfree email reading device, perfect 
to catch a quick glance without distracting too much from a user's 
primary task. Texas Instrument introduced the Chronos [8], a very 
inexpensive smart watch, which is based on the embedded system 
MSP430  that  provides  an  SDK  for  individual  programs.  Newer 
smart watches are Bluetooth enabled and some are water resistant. 
These smart watches are designed to be worn 24 hours a day and 
allow a long shower or a bath in the swimming pool.  
2.3 
Inactivity Recognition  
The  major  difference  in  activity  recognition  between  a  smart 
phone  and  a  smart  watch  is  the  wearing  behavior.  If  the  user 
returns to his home, he will put off the phone. A smart watch can 
be worn constantly at the wearer’s body, no matter if he is doing 
sports or is at rest or sleeps.  

Acceleration Sensor  

Some systems are available that are detecting sleep or resting by 
wearing  a  sensor  at  the  wrist.  The  Actiwatch  is  an  actigraphy 
based  data  logger  designed  for  rest  activity  patterns,  quantify 
physical  activity  or  sleep  [9].  Another  watch-based  sleep 
recognition solution is the Sleeptracker [10] that detects sleep and 
allows  a  wake  up  at  the  estimated  optimum  time.  Some  other 
solution  for  sleep  detection  exists  whereas  some  other  sensor 
technology is used, e.g. EEG signals. 
2.4 
The  performance  of  acceleration  sensors  can  be  measured  in 
accuracy,  quantization,  sampling  rate,  sampling  stability,  range, 
noise,  and  energy  consumption  [11].  Early  types  of  acceleration 
sensors were metal balls within a coil environment that generated 
electric  charge  or  an  induction  field  while  it  was  moved.  Other 
system  concepts  were  piezo  crystal  based;  hereby  a  weight 
pressures  on  a  piezo  crystal  that  response  to  applied  mechanical 
stress  by  electric  charge.  Accelerometers  can  also  use  strain 
gauges.  Earthquake  observatories  were  using  optical  levers  or 
mechanical linkages to amplify the small motions. Nowadays, the 
acceleration  sensors  are  using  electronics.  The  most  common 
sensor  for  home  consumer  products,  e.g.  phones,  cameras,  cars 
etc. is a  MEMS, micro-electro-mechanical  system,  which is very 
cheap and low on power consumption. The usage of the MEMS in 
smart  watches  is  a  tradeoff  between  performance,  energy 
consumption, size and costs. The MEMS-sensor in itself provides 

usually  a  high  frequency  sampling  rate,  e.g.  more  than  1000 
Hertz.  Due  to  the  operating  system  and  power  requirements,  the 
sampling  rate  is  self-adjusting  (Android) or  is  limited  to  a  lower 
frequency. [2] was using 75 Hz, [14] suggested 100 Hz, [15] was 
using 36 Hz, [16] only 20 Hz. It is obvious that a high sampling 
rate provides more data than a lower rate, a good compromise in 
sampling rate seems to be at 32 Hz [11]. One quality criteria of an 
acceleration  sensor  is  the  accuracy.  We  assume  that  the  MEMS 
sensor  show  a  hysteresis  effect 
the  measured  signal. 
Furthermore,  the  data  shows  an  offset  and  a  not  linear  gain. 
Sensor  data  sheets  and  trials  show  a  tremendous  offset  of  each 
axis.  This  offset  can  be  around  0.5  m/s2,  often  the  amplification 
factor shows an error of 2-3 percent. The offset is usually too high 
for physical  way-time calculations.  The following paragraph will 
discuss what requirements are necessary for activity and inactivity 
recognition for acceleration sensors.  

to 

Figure 1: Smart Watch with integrated sensor, connectivity 
and micro matrix display 

CHALLENGES 

3. 
For  adequate  activity  recognition,  the  sensor  has  to  provide 
reliably  sensor  information.  Because  the  most  important  sensor 
for activity monitoring is the acceleration sensor, it is necessary to 
know what the key features are.  

The sensor requirements are distinguished between the application 
fields of  

  Activity monitoring for health and wellness applications 

 

Inactivity recognition 

  Gesture recognition and interaction 

 

Industrial  monitoring  concerning  health 
harmful hand or arm vibrations 

issues  of 

In [11],  significant  features  for  activity  monitoring  are  described 
but some new features for inactivity are to be worked out in order 
to  detect  a  fall  of  a  person,  and  to  differentiate  states  of 
unconsciousness,  sleep  or  a  nap.  In  case  of  inactivity,  some  new 
features and requirements to the sensor are necessary. 

 
 
Some smart watches provide an integrated light sensor. The light 
condition which surrounds a person is an important factor for the 
estimation of his activity state. Some light sensors are measuring 
the  RGB-light  proportions  which  indicate  if  artificial  light  or 
sunlight is ambient. This sensor provides important information in 
hospital environment but in every day live it seems to be different. 
Here, people do a nap while it is light or sleep in front of the T.V. 
at night by a full light condition. If the user is wearing a shirt with 
long  leaves,  the  detected  light  is  different  to  the  real  light 
condition. Furthermore, often the geometrical constellation of the 
integrated  light  sensor  of  the  smart  watch  cannot  detect  the 
ambient light but only the light which shines directly into the light 
sensor.  

ACTIVITY UNIT  

4. 
The  acceleration  sensor  is  the  most  important  sensor  for  activity 
recognition.  The  sensor  detects  three  dimensional  acceleration 
forces  that  are  typically  measured  in  a  Cartesian  coordinate 
system. The axes are x,  y, and z and they  are orthogonal to each 
other.  

If  the  sensor  is  motionless,  only  the  gravity  g  is  affecting  the 
sensor  data.  The  acceleration  values  are  in  a  specific  relation  to 
reach other, no matter  which orientation the sensor shows.  If the 
variables  x,  y,  z  are  the  sensor  values  in  g  (9.81  m/s2),  the 
motionless sensor shows: 

If  the  sensor  will  be  accelerated,  the  right  term  of  this  equation 
can’t be used to determine the average acceleration. One reason is 
that the gravity g is not constant over the world (pole and equator 
have  different  gravity  influence).  Furthermore,  the  sum  of  the 
squared  acceleration  values 
the 
acceleration,  if  one  average  acceleration  value  of  one  axis  is 
negative. In addition, the sensor offset of each axis is affecting the 
equation so a possible error occurs. 

is  not  corresponding 

to 

We developed the algorithm of a new feature. This feature defines 
the mean acceleration of the sensor in the three dimensional space 
per  second.  The  feature  is  called  “activity  unit  (AU)”  and 
describes  the  acceleration  force.  This  feature  is  defined  in  m/s3; 
hereby meter and seconds are elements of the international system 
of units [17].  

The  gravity  constantly  influences  every  material  on  earth,  that’s 
why  the  activity  unit  considers  only  the  additional  acceleration 
forces.  Furthermore  we  introduce  the  simplification  that  the 
acceleration  force  of  interest  is  not  vectored.  In  contrast  to  the 
physical jerk that describes the rate of change of acceleration [18], 
the  AU  is  a  scalar  magnitude,  normalized  to  the  time  interval  of 
one second. The jerk represents only the derivative of acceleration 
with  respect  to  time.  The  jerk  does  not  consider  if  the  present 
acceleration is zero, low or high; only the change of acceleration 
is regarded.  

In  contrast  to  the  jerk,  the  AU  is  respecting  the  present  level  of 
acceleration  while  the  change  of  acceleration  occurs.  To  give  an 
example,  the  jerk  would  be  the  same  (zero)  in  the  case  that  the 
sensor  is  motionless  or  in  the  case  that  the  sensor  is  accelerated 
with  a  constant  value.  The  AU  is  zero  in  case  of  the  motionless 
sensor  too,  but  in  the  case  of  the  accelerated  sensor  -  it  is 
different. Hereby the  AU represents the  difference of the current 
acceleration to the average acceleration condition. 

This  leads  to  the  following  definition  of  the  activity  unit: 

The variables x,  y, z are the sensor  values in m/s2. xn,  yn, zn, are 
the  sensor  values,  received  by  each  readout  cycle  n.  N  is  the 
number  of  readout  cycles  per  second.  xmean,  ymean,  zmean  are  the 
averages of the sensor values of each axis. These values describe 
the  constant  force  to  the  sensor  and  can  be  determined  by  the 
inclusion of a moving average.  

For a motionless sensor, only the gravity  forces are  affecting  the 
measured  values  and  these  forces  are  constant.  Because  of  the 
moving average, the algorithm will detect no force after a  while, 
zero AU. If a translation occurs, the acceleration will be detected 
and  measured.  If  the  sensor  will  be  rotated,  the  sensor  detects 
different gravity force for each axis.  

If  the  sensor  is  motionless  after  the  turn  again,  the  algorithm 
should  detect  no  acceleration  force  after  a  defined  time  interval. 
This  is  performed  by  the  implementation  of  the  moving  average 
algorithm.  We  assume  that  a  sensor  will  be  read  out  with  32 
Hertz.  If  the  sensor  is  turned  by  90  degree,  we  require  that  the 
acceleration  force  of  one  axis,  that  had  no  gravity  influence 
before,  will  adapt  to  the  gravity  force  of  one  tau  (63.2  percent) 
within  2  seconds.  The  two  second  period  will  provide  64  data-
triples  which  is  a  usable  window  frame  length  for  activity 
recognition [11]. The time requirement leads to the average factor 
of a=0.95 by the following average algorithm, the given average is 
analog to ymean and zmean: 

Hereby x(n) is the current sensor value, the factor a is an absolute 
term and xmean(n) is the calculated average. n describes the readout 
cycle. xmean(n-1) is the calculated average of the readout cycle n-1. 
If  parameter  “a”  would be  set  on  a  =  0,  the  algorithm  for  AU  is 
directly matching the jerk.  

The sensor values of the x, y, and z-axis are represented by the SI-
unit m/s2, so 1 AU is 1 m/s3 (m/s2 per second). 

Because of the consideration of the mean acceleration of each axis 
for the AU value, the constant  sensor offset  and constant  gravity 
influence  can  be  ignored.  This  is  a  very  powerful  feature  of  the 
equation  because  some  acceleration  sensors  are  charged  with  a 
high  offset.  AUs  can  be  summed  up  to  estimate  the  physical 
activity,  hereby  the  sum  of  the  AUs  are  a  rough  indicator  how 
active  the  wearer  has  been  throughout  the  day.  Furthermore,  the 
AU can be used to estimate the noise of the sensor. 

The  AU  can  be  used  as  a  very  important  feature  for  physical 
activity recognition. 

5. 
APPLICATIONS 
5.1  Wearing Detection 
When  smart  watches  detect  no  physical  activity,  there  is  the 
obvious  assumption  that  the  user  is  not  active.  Even  the  human 
body  seems  to  be  calm;  the  wrist  sensor  measures  a  significant 
higher activity than if the sensor would be dismounted. This effect 
can only be noticed when the sensor noise is very low.  

The  defined  AU  is  a  good  parameter  for  the  estimation  of  the 
noise level of the sensor. When the smart watch is motionless and 

5,0222)(1zyxgNnmeannmeannmeannzzyyxxNAU121222))()()((11a)-(1x(n)+a1)-(n x= (n)meanmeanx 
 
 
 
lies on a table, the typical AU-value of a sensor (e.g. Meta Watch 
Strata [19]) in 6 bit / g – quantization mode) is approx. 0.4 m/s3. If 
the same watch is in 10 bit / g – quantization mode, the assessed 
AU value is much lower and is approx. 0.04 m/s3.  

If the smart watch is set in 10 bit / g – quantization mode and the 
user  is  stretching  the  arm  and  hold  the  watch  motionless,  the 
system will measure approx. 0.16 AU. In comparison to the value 
of  0.04  AU  we  received  from  the  watch  on  the  table,  we  can 
identify the arm stretching condition. The received values are only 
possible if the sensor is working in the 10 bit / g mode. A 6 bit / g 
mode would provide a noise of 0.4 AU if the arm is stretched out 
whereas no difference of the wearing condition is possible. 

The introduced algorithm for activity units is an important feature 
in  the  time  domain.  For  the  frequency  domain,  it  is  necessary  to 
analyze  the  spectral  distribution  of  the  movements.  The  Fourier 
transformation enables the analysis if the signal is overlaid with a 
white  or  a  colored  noise.  If  the  sensor  is  totally  motionless,  the 
sensor noise is stochastically distributed (white noise).  Any light 
micro  movement  is  influencing  the  spectrum,  the  noise  will  be 
colored.  

Figure 2 (smart  watch is set in 10 bit/g mode, 32 Hz) shows the 
noise while the smart watch is lying on a table, the figure 3 shows 
the noise while the watch is worn at the wrist of a user. When the 
smart watch is on the table, we recognize that noise in the Fourier 
spectrum is stochastically distributed. 

Figure 2: Frequency spectrum while smart watch 
 is lying on a table 

to 

little  movements 

the  spectrum.  Depending  on 

In figure 3 we can clearly see a main frequency and the influence 
the 
of 
manufacture and sensor type, the sensor of the smart watch can be 
configured  into  a  different  modus,  especially  quantization  and 
sampling rate. Setting the smart watch into the highest sensitivity 
mode, the effects of  white noise and colored noise become  more 
visible. 

Figure 3: Frequency spectrum while smart watch is worn 
 and arm is stretched out 

Usually, when a user is wearing a watch, the arm is not stretched 
out. The feature AU provides only a slightly higher value that for 
the  lying  on  a  table.  In  combination  with  the  features  of  the 
frequency domain and the recognized effects of colored noise we 
can do to the assumption that we can detect if the smart watch is 
worn or not.  

On one side we are considering the AU value by using a defined 
threshold  (depending  on  the  Smart  Watch  model),  to  distinguish 
between worn or laid down. On the other side we are considering 
the  frequency  band  of  the  Fourier  spectrum.  We  are  adding  the 
Fourier  magnitudes  of  each  band  (low  band  and  high  band)  and 
are  calculating  the  quotient.  Here  we  are  also  considering  a 
threshold of the quotient as the indicator of worn or laid down. 

Sleep Detection 

5.2 
When a person sleeps, the smart watch is permanently measuring 
micro  activity  of  the  body.  Our  algorithm  detects  an  activity  of 
approx. 0.05 AU while sleeping, depending on the position of the 
wrist,  mattress  and  physical  condition  (weight,  BMI  etc.).  If  the 
user turns from side to side while he is sleeping, the smart watch 
detects  a  very  high  AU  value.  Together  with  other  features,  the 
AU can be used to detect if the user sleeps or is wake.  

The following figure 4 shows the 24h diagram of a user from 12 
p.m. to 12.p.m. (x-axis). The y-axis is the degree of inactivity. The 
red  graph  illustrates  the  automatically  detected  sleep,  the  green 
graph shows the detected activity period. 

Figure 4: Sleep recognition with a smart watch 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The requirements to the sensor for sleep recognition are low. We 
identify that a quantization of 6 bit / g and a sampling frequency 
of less than 1 Hz is sufficient for sleep detection. This requirement 
leads to very low energy consumption for the smart watch. 

5.3  Heart Rate Detection  
The  sensitivity  of  the  smart  watch  allows  the  recognition  of  the 
heart  rate.  We  implemented  an  application  of  an  android  phone 
that  determines  the  heart  rate  whenever  the  user  holds  the  smart 
watch to his chest.  

Figure 4: User holds his smart watch to his chest 

The heart rate detection algorithm uses the AU - values. Therefore 
we performed an autocorrelation, using a set of 640 AU – samples 
that  took  20  seconds  because  the  sampling  rate  is  32  Hz.  When 
the  acceleration  sensor  is  in  8  bit  /g  mode,  the  algorithm  is 
detecting  the  heart  rate;  in  the  6  bit  /  g  mode  the  signal  is  very 
noisy and  we hardly detect a pulse. (Maybe  we  have to collect a 
larger data set for the correlation.)  

Figure  5  shows  the  corresponding  signal  with  the  heart  rate. 
Hereby  the  period  length  is  about  30  samples,  which  relates  to 
approx. 60 beats per minute. 

Figure 5: Autocorrelation of detected heart rate signal 

Industrial Applications  

5.4 
Smart  watches  are  mobile  devices  with  a  small  display  and  a 
vibration feedback to indicate incoming messages. Because of the 
sensor functionality, smart watches can be used to support indoor 
navigation  features  in  construction  or  maintenance  work.  In 
construction  environments,  the  environment  might  be  noisy  and 
dirty. If a worker needs guidance to a place of interest, he can be 
guided by vibration signals of the smart watch.  

Within the research project eKon, we are developing new indoor 
navigation  technologies  in  the  context  of  ship  construction  and 
maintenance. The research project eKon is funded by the German 
Federal  Ministry  of  Economics  and  Technology. Hereby,  Smart 
watches are useful interaction devices for model based navigation, 
while  the  3D  plans  of  the  environment  are  known.  Smart  watch 
supports inertial navigation as well because of the capability of a 
distance measuring functionality (pedometer).   

In  some  working  environments,  machines  are 
transferring 
vibrations  to  the  hand  or  arm  of  the  worker.  The  Control  of 
Vibration at Work Regulations 2005 (the Vibration Regulations), 
came into force on 6 July 2005 in Great Britain by the HSE [13]. 
The Control of Vibration is based on a European Union Directive 
to  protect  workers  from  risks  to  their  health  and  safety  from 
vibration. Hereby the regulations on hand-arm vibration define a 
maximum  of  daily  exposure  value  of  5  m/s2  A(8);  and  a  daily 
exposure  action  value  of  2.5  m/s2  A(8).  The  maximum  vibration 
force  on  hand  or  arm  might  be  very  high,  common  devices 
provide  a  measuring  range  of  approx.  +/-500  g,  some  others  +/- 
1000 g. In comparison, the standard MEMS sensor has a range of 
max. +/- 16 g.  The direct exposure to the arm or hand  cannot be 
measured exactly by standard MEMS sensors. However the smart 
watch  is  able  to  perform  pattern  recognition  of  the  acceleration 
signals  that  allows  the  identification  of  the  used  tools  and  their 
using  duration.  We  expect  that  the  smart  watch  will  be  used  for 
monitoring the hand and arm vibration exposition in combination 
with the recreation time in the near future. 

CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 

6. 
Smart  watches  are  wrist  watches  with  computational  power, 
sensor  functionality  and  connectivity  to  the  internet.  Smart 
watches  allow  a  new  mobile  assistance  and  are  affecting  our 
business and social life.  

Because of the haptic feedback of information by vibration signals 
or  micro  display  messages,  smart  watches  enable  a  user  support 
especially  in  home  environments,  construction  or  maintenance 
environment,  or  indoor  navigation  in  ships  and  submarines.  The 
smart  watch  with  its  integrated  and  body  worn  sensors  enable  a 
constant monitoring during day and night. Hereby it is necessary 
that the sensor is sensitive and reliable for the desired application.  

The paper introduced a gravity free parameter for the acceleration 
in  the  three  dimensional  space,  the  activity  unit  (AU).  The  AU 
consists of standardized SI-units and allows a reproducible metric 
for activity estimation.  

The  work  presents  an  algorithm  to  distinguish  if  the  user  is 
wearing  the  smart  watch  or  not.  The  smart  watch  is  also  able  to 
detect  the  heart  rate  if  the  user  holds  it  to  his  chest.  Hereby  the 
requirement to the acceleration sensor is a sampling rate of 32 Hz 
and a quantization of 10 bit / g. 

 
 
 
 
Other  applications  show  the  ability  of  sleep  detection  by  smart 
watches. Sleep detection and physical activity recognition require 
a 6 bit / g quantization.  

Further work will be done in research of micro activity in periods 
of  physical  inactivity.  We  are  convinced  that  smart  watches  will 
provide additional mobile assistance to the user that we can´t even 
imagine today. 

[8]  Texas Instrument Chronos EZ 430, 

http://processors.wiki.ti.com/index.php/EZ430-
Chronos?DCMP=Chronos&HQS=Other+OT+chronoswiki, 
last access: 04/21/2013 

[9]  Actiwatch, Philips Respironics, Philips Healthcare, P.O. Box 

10.000, 560 DA best, The Netherlands 

[10] Sleeptracker, Innovative Sleep Solutions, 2870 Peachtree 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

7. 
We thank John Trimpop and Sven Berger for their support of the 
presented work. 

8. 
[1]  Lloyd C.: Time Comes for the Superwatch, The Times, 

REFERENCES 

Newspaper, 3 Thomas More Square, London, E98 1XY, 13. 
Jan. 1995 

[2]  Bao, L., Intille, S., Activity recognition from user-annotated 
acceleration data, Pervasive Computing, Springer, 2004 

[3]  Bieber G., Peter C., Using Physical Activity for User 

Behavior Analysis, 1st International Conference on 
Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments - 
PetraE 2008, ACM, Athens, 2008 

[4]  Brugniaux  J. Niva A., Pulkkinen I., Laukkanen R., Richalet 
J., Pichon A.: Polar Activity Watch 200: a new device to 
accurately assess energy expenditure, British journal of 
sports medicine, BMJ Publishing Group Ltd and British 
Association of Sport and Exercise Medicine, vol. 44/4, pp. 
245-249, 2010 

[5]  Maurer, U., Rowe, A., Smailagic, A., Siewiorek, D.P., 

eWatch: a wearable sensor and notification platform, 
Proceedings of Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor 
Networks, IEEE, 2006. 

[6]  Mayton, B.: WristQue: A Personal Sensor Wristband, 

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, master thesis, 2012 

[7]  Migicovsky E., InfoPulse: a Wristworn Ambient Display, 
Proc. of 2nd Workshop on Ambient Information Systems. 
Colocated with Ubicomp 2008, Seoul, South Korea., CEUR 
Workshop Proceedings, 2008, ISSN 1613-0073 

Road #140, Atlanta, GA 30305, USA, 
www.sleeptracker.com 

[11] Bieber G., Voskamp J., Urban B., Activity Recognition for 

Everyday Life on Mobile Phones, Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, Volume 5615/2009, pp.289-296, Springer 
Berlin / Heidelberg, 2009, ISSN 0302-9743 

[12] Kakei S., Hoffman D., Strick P.  et. al.: Muscle and 

movement representations in the primary motor cortex, 
Science, Vol 285, Num 5436, pp. 2136--2139, Washington, 
DC, USA, 1999 

[13] Health and Safety Executive, Great Britain, 

http://www.hse.gov.uk/ 

[14] Lee M., Kim J., Kim K., Lee I., Jee S., Yoo S.: Physical 
activity recognition using a single tri-axis accelerometer, 
Proceedings of the World Congress on Engineering and 
Computer, Science 2009 Vol I, WCECS 2009, October 20-
22, 2009, San Francisco, USA, 2009 

[15] Yang, J.: Toward physical activity diary: Motion recognition 
using simple acceleration features with mobile phones. In: 
Proceedings of the 1st international workshop on Interactive 
multimedia for consumer electronics ACM, pp. 1–10, 2009 

[16] Kwapisz, J.R.: Weiss, G.M. ; Moore, S.A.: Activity 

recognition using cell phone accelerometers. In: ACM 
SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter 12, Nr. 2, pp. 74–82, 2011 

[17] SI - International Bureau of Weights and Measures, The 

International System of Units (SI), Brochure (8th ed.), 2006,  
ISBN 92-822-2213-6 

[18] Schot S.: Jerk: the time rate of change of acceleration, 

American Journal of Physics, 46.11, pp. 1090-1094, 1978 

[19] Meta Watch, Meta Watch, Ltd., Dallas, Texas | Espoo, 

Finland, www.metawatch.com 

 
 
 
 
