Sitting in the Same Boat: A Case Study of a Combined 
Awareness System and Behaviour Change Technology 

Florian Güldenpfennig 
HCI Group 
TU Wien, Austria 

Roman Ganhör 
Multidisciplinary Design Group 
TU Wien, Austria 

Geraldine Fitzpatrick  
HCI Group 
TU Wien, Austria 

{florian.gueldenpfennig | roman.ganhoer | geraldine.fitzpatrick}@tuwien.ac.at 

to 

technology 

ABSTRACT 
For  several  years,  efforts  have  been  taken  to  create 
systems  for  mediating  a  feeling  of  connectedness  and 
affective awareness among separated family  members or 
friends. At the same time research has been carried out on 
designing 
foster  behaviour  change, 
especially to increase physical activity. Numerous  works 
on  behaviour  change,  both  in  academia  and  in  the 
industry,  draw  strongly  on  motivating  by  utilizing 
interpersonal relationships. However, within this research 
social  relationships  are  employed  as  a  means  of 
accomplishing  positive  behaviour.  In  this  paper,  we  aim 
at  designing  a  system  for  supporting  both  affective 
awareness  and  behaviour  change  with  equal  emphasis. 
We  argue  that  such  a  system  can  benefit  from  the 
synergetic  effects  between  both  research  concerns.  Our 
prototype 
concept, 
establishing connectedness through the shared experience 
of positive behaviour change (in our case study increased 
physical activity), enabled by both mutual motivation and 
a reverse rewarding strategy.  

demonstrates 

application 

the 

system, 

Author Keywords 
communication, 
Awareness 
behaviour  change,  persuasive 
technology,  physical 
activity,  television,  playful  elements,  mutual  motivation, 
reverse rewarding, reciprocity.  

lightweight 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m.  Information  interfaces  and  presentation  (e.g., 
HCI): Miscellaneous.  

INTRODUCTION 
Staying in touch  with family  and friends is  not always a 
trivial  matter  in  our  here-today-gone-tomorrow  society. 
Too much work, a general lack of time and long distances 
can  eat  up  social  relationships  leaving  people  separated 
from  the  ones  they  care  about.  On  these  grounds 
researchers  in  HCI  and  CSCW  have  been  working  on 
developing  awareness  systems  for  several  years  now 
(Hassenzahl  et  al.,  2012).  Such  awareness  systems 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights 
for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be 
honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org.  

OzCHI '15 , December 07 - 10 2015, Melbourne, VIC, Australia 
Copyright © 2015 ACM 978-1-4503-3673-4/15/12... $15.00 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2838739.2838823. 

employed  communication  technology  to  foster  social 
relationships between remote family members and friends 
by  establishing  a  feeling  of  connectedness  and  helping 
people to stay in touch.  

At  the  same  time,  modern  fast-pacing  living  conditions 
often hinder people in fulfilling plans and good intentions 
concerning  physical  activity.  In  societies  around  the 
world  people  are  less  and  less  involved  in  physical 
exercise. Consequently, more and more people deal with 
obesity, which not only is a considerable problem for the 
person,  but  for  the  society  in  general  (Lakdawalla  & 
Philipson, 2009). In recent years, the HCI community and 
the industry have taken efforts to deal with that challenge 
by  designing  technology  for  supporting  motivation  and 
behaviour change such as  “activity trackers” and the like 
(Hekler,  Klasnja,  Froehlich,  &  Buman,  2013).  Many  of 
these  works  draw  on  or  investigate  motivation  by 
involving  interpersonal  relationships  or  social  influence, 
for  example  (Mueller,  O'Brien,  &  Thorogood,  2007; 
Parker,  2014;  Zuckerman  &  Gal-Oz,  2014).  It 
is 
noticeable that enabling social exchange is a core concern 
of  both  awareness  systems  and  behaviour  change 
technology.  

In this paper, we examine the intersection between these 
two  research  strands  and  their  commonalities.  We  raise 
questions about what behaviour change can learn or adopt 
from  successful  awareness  systems,  and  vice  versa.  Is  it 
possible  to  enhance  friendship  and  support  change  for  a 
better behaviour at the same time, now that everyone is so 
busy? And, can both approaches mutually strengthen each 
other?  We  argue  for  the  worthiness  of  combining  both 
research  areas  and  propose  chances  for  creating  strong 
synergetic effects. To investigate this concept, the present 
work contributes an exploratory case study  for gathering 
an initial primarily qualitative description of  how  such a 
system can ‘fit into the life’ of potential users. We do not 
aim at generalizing to populations since this is case study 
research  (Baskarada,  2014).  Instead,  we  contribute 
‘anecdotal  evidence’  to  motivate  extending  the  initial 
prototype and further empirical studies.  

technology 

The paper is organized as follows. First, the terminology 
for  affective  awareness/awareness 
and 
systems and behaviour change is clarified on the basis of 
related  research.  Second,  the  intersection  between  both 
research  areas  is  examined.  Third,  a  pilot  application  is 
introduced  that  aims  at  motivating  for  more  physical 
activity as well as establishing awareness between distant 
living  friends.  Finally,  suggestions  and  opportunities  for 
further research investigations are proposed. 

309

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RELATED WORK AND DEFINITIONS 
Awareness  systems 
in  personal  settings  constitute 
computer  mediated  communication  systems  that  allow 
people 
to  maintain  awareness  about  each  other’s 
activities.  The  communication  itself  was  described  as 
being  lightweight,  emotional,  informal  and  at  low  effort 
(Markopoulos  et  al.,  2004).  Thus,  affective  awareness 
systems (cf. also ambient displays) are in contrast to more 
traditional  forms  of  communication  that  aim  at  the 
explicit  exchange  of  messages  and  data.  Liechti  and 
Ichikawa  (2000,  p.  13)    introduced  the  notion  affective 
awareness  and  defined  it  as  “a  general  sense  of  being 
close to one’s family and friends”. Another term used in 
this  context  is  connectedness,  defined  as  a  “positive 
emotional appraisal, characterized by a feeling of staying 
in touch within on-going social relationships” (Romero et 
al., 2007, p. 303).  

Computer mediated awareness in a home setting has been 
studied  extensively  and  widely.  For  example,  Lindley 
(2012)  explored  the  usage  of  a  message  device  for 
supporting  cross-generational  communication.  Octavia, 
Hoven, and Mondt (2007), on the other hand, conducted 
an  exploratory  study  to  better  understand  strategies  of 
people  living  separately  to  stay  in  touch.  A  renowned 
study  by  Mynatt,  Rowan,  Craighill,  and  Jacobs  (2001) 
captured  physical  activity  of  smart-home  residents  with 
sensors and visualized the data in an abstract fashion. The 
visualization  was  sent  to  a  digital  photography  frame 
located at the homes of the distant family members. 

Technology  to  support  behaviour  change:  Fogg  (2002) 
coined  the  term  captology  for  technology  that  persuades 
the user to adopt a desired behaviour. In many studies this 
behaviour  was  increased  physical  exercise  (Consolvo, 
Everitt,  Smith,  &  Landay,  2006;  Consolvo  et  al.,  2008; 
Lin,  Mamykina,  Lindtner,  Delajoux,  &  Strub,  2006; 
Maitland  et  al.,  2006).  In  line  with  these  efforts,  the 
notion of personal informatics was coined by Li, Dey and 
Forlizzi (2010). 

Technologies  for  behaviour  change  such  as  outlined 
above  draw  strongly  on  theories  from  psychology. 
Persuasive  systems  have  employed  classical  behaviour 
theories such as the Transtheoretical Model, Goal Setting 
Theory, and Social Cognitive Theory. In HCI, Consolvo, 
McDonald  and  Landay  (2009)  and  Hekler  et  al.  (2013) 
have compiled a good overview on these topics. 

COMBINING TECHNOLOGIES FOR AWARENESS AND 
BEHAVIOUR CHANGE – DESIGN RATIONALE 
In  this  section,  we  identify  and  describe  conspicuous 
intersections  between  systems  for  affective  awareness 
and  behaviour  change.  Consequently,  due 
their 
commonalities we will argue for designing for both target 
areas at the same time. Taking a look at the strengths of 
each  domain  might  offer  an  opportunity  for  creating 
strong  synergic  effects.  It 
that  social 
relationships  play  a  crucial  role  in  both  awareness 

is  apparent 

to 

to 

leads 

and  mediate 

systems  and  behaviour  change.  This 
the 
following  question:  If  we  can  design  appropriate  shared 
appropriate 
experiences 
communication  channels,  will  it  increase  a  desirable 
behaviour,  and  conversely  create  a  positive  effect  of 
affective awareness? We go on to discuss this question as 
exemplified  in  our  own  prototype,  explaining  our  ideas 
and assumptions in more detail. 

them 

by 

Social  relationships  and  social  influence:  the  aim  of 
awareness  systems  is  promoting  social  relationships. 
However,  many  persuasive  or  behaviour  change 
applications  also  place  great  reliance  upon  interpersonal 
relationships  and  social  influence  (Chiu  et  al.,  2009; 
Consolvo  et  al.,  2006;  Consolvo,  McDonald,  &  Landay, 
2009;  Lin  et  al.,  2006;  Maitland  et  al.,  2006).  In 
particular, it is argued that activity tracking for leveraging 
behaviour  change  can  benefit 
social  and 
collaborative  components 
(Rooksby  et  al.,  2014). 
Mueller,  O'Brien,  and  Thorogood  (2007),  for  example, 
created  a  jogging  application  that  allowed  runners  to 
exercise together mediated by spatialised audio, although 
they were separated by distance. Zuckerman and Gal-Oz 
(2014)  implemented  a  social  comparison  component  in 
their  jogging  app  and  found  that  this  was  as  efficient  as 
visualizing  or  quantifying  progress.  Therefore, 
the 
motivating force in our own prototype will draw on social 
influence.  

from 

Shared experiences have been reported to play a leading 
role  for  awareness  systems  in  establishing  a  feeling  of 
connectedness. Affective awareness appears to work best 
when  people  are  engaged  in  shared  experiences  (Liechti 
&  Ichikawa,  2000),  as  those  events  ‘act  like  glue’  in 
friendships  (Octavia  et  al.,  2007,  p.  81).  Sharing 
experiences  can  also  be  used  as  a  major  strategy  in 
connecting separate living families (Ballagas et al., 2010; 
Markopoulos  et  al.,  2004).  We  suggest  taking  those 
findings  on  by  making  positive  behaviour  change  the 
shared  experience  and  hence  establish  a  strong  bonding 
between awareness and behaviour change system. 

Lightweight  exchange  of  messages  is  another  important 
component of awareness systems for sharing experiences 
and for fostering social connectedness. The importance of 
this  component  has  been  described  by  various  authors, 
and  it  is  part  of  several  multi-participant  persuasive 
applications  such  as  Playful  Bottle  that  let  users  send 
social  reminders  to  their  friends  (Chiu  et  al.,  2009). 
Houston  (Consolvo  et  al.,  2006)  featured  a  commenting 
component  allowing  social  influence.  The  authors  of 
Shakra  observed  that  “merely  the  knowledge  that  others 
can  detect  (track)  one’s  activity  (…)  makes  one  more 
active”  (Maitland  et  al.,  2006,  p.  7).  We  therefore 
implemented a lightweight messaging component for our 
prototype  incorporating  a  chat  module  and  an  ambient 
lamp (see next section). 

310

 
AL 

Figure 1. Left: P1 sitting in front of TV (home PC with TV tuner) with ambient lamp placed below the screen (marked 
by red arrow AL). Right: Detail of the application’s web interface. Users can review each other’s physical activity and 
check their television rewards. The crossed arrows indicate that participants mutually accumulated TV minutes. 

Visualization of behaviour: Awareness systems as well as 
technologies  for  behaviour  change  deal  with  behaviour 
data  visualization.  Consolvo  et  al.  (2006)  found  that 
participants  of  the  Houston  study  valued  the  trending 
information  of  physical  activity.  The  Digital  Family 
Portrait system displayed a history of past behaviours on 
a  digital  picture  frame.  The  frame  of  this  renowned 
affective awareness application was populated with small 
icons representing current as well as past conditions of a 
portrayed  person  (Mynatt  et  al.,  2001).  As  in  this 
example,  behaviour  data  is  often  represented  in  an 
abstract  fashion.  This  applies  to  both  awareness  and 
behaviour change systems. Ubifit, for example, employed 
a metaphoric blooming garden to visualize agile physical 
activity  (Consolvo  et  al.,  2008;  Consolvo  et  al.,  2009). 
Fish  ‘n’  Steps  let  the  number  of  fish  in  a  virtual  tank 
correspond to the step count of study participants (Lin et 
al.,  2006).  Accordingly,  we  suggest  an  abstract  data 
visualization  for  designing  combined  connectedness  and 
temporal 
behaviour  change  systems.  In  visualizing, 
course  can  be  motivating  (Lin  et  al.,  2006)  as  it  might 
help  to  establish  a  more  intense  awareness  of  the  daily 
routine of a person. (However, at the same time the users’ 
privacy  should  be  taken  into  account.)  Summarizing,  an 
ambient  device  can  be  a  strategy  in  terms  of  affective 
awareness  as  well  as  motivation  (Consolvo  et  al.,  2009; 
Consolvo  et  al.,  2008;  Mynatt  et  al.,  2001).  Thus,  our 
prototype  made  use  of  abstract  graphs,  and  we  also 
offered  an  additional  ambient  mood 
the 
participants  to  support  the  lightweight  exchange  of 
messages  in  form  of  colour-coded  ‘moods’  at  the 
periphery of attention (Bakker, van den Hoven, & Eggen, 
2015).  Similar  mood  lamps  have  been  successfully  used 
before  in  HCI  research  to  convey  emotional  states,  for 
example (Balaam, Fitzpatrick, Good, & Luckin, 2010). 

lamp 

to 

Playful elements: A  variety of awareness and  motivation 
technologies as well as applications for behaviour change 
were  games  or  consisted  of  game-like  elements.  Other 
applications  employed  playful  metaphors  and 
fun 
elements  for  motivation  (Chiu  et  al.,  2009;  Consolvo  et 
al.,  2008;  Consolvo  et  al.,  2009;  Lin  et  al.,  2006). 
Awareness systems also requested users to play with each 
other  (Ballagas  et  al.,  2010)  or  display  information  in 
humorous  or  amusing  ways  (Gaver,  2002;  Mynatt  et  al., 
2001). Shared experiences make people feel close to each 
other,  especially  when  their  experiences  are  associated 
with positive emotions (Liechti & Ichikawa, 2000, p. 13). 
We  hence  decided  that  our  prototype  should  utilize 

playful elements to motivate users to continue practicing 
and to support the users mutual awareness. 

EXPLORATORY PILOT STUDY 
The  proposed  prototype  was  designed 
to  support 
behaviour  change  as  well  as  affective  awareness 
considering  the  commonalties  identified  in  the  last 
section.  The  case  study  was  conducted  to  gather  initial 
feedback  on  our  considerations  and  design  decisions.  In 
this  context,  we  were  also  interested  in  how  the  concept 
of joining awareness and behaviour change assisted users 
to achieve a self-defined goal (e.g., exercising more). 

Description of our exploratory application  

Due to the application’s aim to increase a users’ physical 
fitness  and  to  connect  two  separately  living  friends, 
exercising  (physical  fitness)  was  made  the  reason  for 
users to get in touch (social connectedness).  

reward  stimulus 

Our  application  employed  a 
for 
motivating  physical  activity:  the  users  had  to  earn  their 
privilege to watch TV similar to Telecycle (Fogg, 2002). 
Allocated  footsteps  paid  off  in  minutes  of  allowed  TV 
consumption.  In  order  to  preserve  the  playful  and  fun 
character of the application time  measurements  were  not 
enforced  or  controlled.  A  special  feature  of 
the 
application  was  that  users  (in  test  condition  2)  did  not 
work  for  their  own  ‘TV  time  account’;  in  contrast,  they 
accumulated TV minutes for their distant friend. This can 
be considered as a playful reverse rewarding strategy and 
might  also 
interactions  or  a 
strengthened  social  connection.  Figuratively  speaking, 
both  participants  were  sitting  in  the  same  boat.  In 
addition, users could post comments or set the mood lamp 
to a certain colour to express their approval / disapproval 
of  their  friends’  performances.  Ambient  coloured  light 
has  proven  useful  for  emotional  expression  before 
(Balaam  et  al.,  2010),  and  made  information  or  signals 
subtly accessible.  

interesting 

lead 

to 

Technically, every user had access to a personalized web 
page  (Figure  1  right)  allowing  her  to  review  behaviour 
data,  exchange  text  messages  and  to  control  the  other’s 
ambient mood lamp (Figure 1 left). Physical activity was 
tracked with a pedometer and was made accessible on the 
web  application  updating  every  night  at  8:15  pm.  The 
pedometer  samplings  were  visualized  as  an  abstract 
representation  of  a  user’s  physical  activity  over  a  given 
time  period  (Figure  1  right).  The  resolution  of  the 
visualization  was  fine  enough  to  establish  awareness  by 

311

conveying  information  about  a  user’s  daily  routine  and 
coarse enough to protect a user’s privacy.  

(one 

female,  one  male)  with 

CASE STUDY SETUP AND FINDINGS 
Methods. For the exploratory case study we recruited two 
participants 
the 
characteristics of the intended target group of the system: 
separate  living  friends  (divided  by  distance)  in  their  20s 
30s  with  an  affinity  to  self-tracking  technologies  and 
willingness to exercise  more. They participated in a  first 
test  run  lasting  8  days  to  study  how  they  would  interact 
with  the  system  in  their  natural  context.  We  also 
established  two  test  conditions  in  order  to  get  initial 
feedback on different reward strategies. Condition 1 was 
a  four-day  trail  during  which  participants  accumulated 
their  own  minutes  for  TV  consumption.  More  physical 
activity resulted in more minutes of TV consumption for 
oneself.  Condition  2  was  also  a  four-day  trail,  but  it 
employed  the  strategy  of  reverse  rewarding  mentioned 
above. In this condition participants ‘worked out’ for their 
distant friend’s TV consumption. 

To  count 
the  steps,  commercial  pedometers  were 
employed and the data was sent to a server. Every night at 
8:15 pm the amount of TV reward was calculated on the 
basis  of  the  number  of  steps  and  published  on  the  web 
interface  (Figure  1  right).  The  usage  of  the  mood  lamp 
was  logged  on  the  server  as  well.  After  the  study,  the 
server  data  was  reviewed  and  assessed  manually. 
Additionally,  semi-structured  interviews  were  conducted 
after  the  last  day  of  the  trial  and  subsequently  analysed 
for salient comments and themes in the feedback.   

Findings 
Behaviour  change:  although  the  short  duration  of  the 
study  does  not  allow  for  investigating  changes  in 
behaviour,  there  was  evidence  of  synergy  between 
awareness  and  motivation.  Condition  2 
(reverse 
rewarding)  showed  slightly  more  physical  activity  for 
both  participants.  The  rewarded  minutes  for  days  1  to  8 
for  each  participant  are  shown  in  Table  1.  (Note:  the 
values  of  days  5-8  have  been  swapped  between 
participants due to the reverse rewarding strategy). 

1 

29 

50 

2 

25 

21 

3 

23 

77 

4 

23 

76 

5 

14 

34 

6 

62 

66 

7 

72 

53 

8 

83 

53 

P1 

P2 

Table 1. Rewarded minutes of TV. Condition 1: Days 
1 to 4. Condition 2: Days 5 to 8. (Reverse rewarding is 
indicated by different colours/shades of grey.) 

Rewards  and  reciprocity:  the  chat  logs  indicated  social 
engagement  and  encouragement  such  as  in  this  quote: 
“What?  Only  14mins  TV  for  me?  Please  remember  my 
favourite  episode  tomorrow”  (P1).  Such  a  statement  can 
be  considered  as  a  custom  tailored  motivation  message, 
which was suggested to be a beneficial strategy for health 
behaviour  change  (Chua  et  al.,  2011).  Another  social-
motivational issue was expressed by P2: “Sometimes I am 
more  motivated  doing  something  for  a  friend  than  for 
me”. Furthermore, the participants reported that they felt 
motivated to exercise and to act responsible, because they 

to  “spoil” 

didn’t  want 
the  other 
participant: “It would have felt very bad if he earned me 
enough TV time at the end of the day, while at the same 
time I let him down” (P2). 

the  evening  for 

in 

Social  awareness:  reverse  rewarding  was  the  preferred 
mode  since 
this  condition  connectedness  was 
established by the other’s physical activity  in addition to 
the web interface and the ambient lamp. P2 described it as 
“you  could  feel  the  friend,  because  he  was  literally 
shaping  the  day  by  influencing  the  TV  program”.  This 
corresponds  with  P1,  who  enjoyed  both  rewarding 
strategies, however, liked condition 2 even better, due to 
its  more  “suspenseful”  and  motivating  character.  The 
reaction  towards  the  ambient  lamp  was  positive,  as  “it 
expresses  one’s  feelings  on  site  at  the  friend’s  house” 
(P1).  Still,  the  lamp  was  not  considered  the  most 
important  component  of  the  prototype  and  P2  suggested 
that it could also be replaced or complemented by “some 
mobile phone app or background widget”. 

In  summary,  the  participants  enjoyed  both  rewarding 
strategies, however, both preferred condition 2, due to its 
“suspenseful”,  connecting  and  motivating  setup.  P2 
enjoyed  the  system  that  much  that  she  would  like  to 
continue and would even pay for her own equipment. She 
was  thankful  for  the  study  or  application  as  “it  was  a 
chance to revitalize our [the participants’] friendship”. 

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This  paper  constitutes  an  initial  investigation  of  the 
intersection  between  awareness  systems  and  behaviour 
change  technology.  As  it  is  an  initial  exploratory  case 
study,  the  findings  cannot  be  generalized,  however, 
provide promising qualitative indications that the  system 
can  be  useful  for  the  target  group.  For  future  work,  it  is 
crucial  to  refine  the  prototype  and  to  run  controlled 
experiments  with  a  larger  number  of  participants  and  to 
create  design  guidelines  so  that  the  resulting  system  can 
move beyond just ‘tracking activity and then posting this’ 
to get encouraged by friends (such a guideline could, for 
example,  recommend  reverse  rewarding).  Summarizing, 
in  this  paper,  our  contribution  is  two-fold:  (1)  We 
identified  and  elaborated  similarities  and  intersections 
between  behaviour  change  technologies  and  awareness 
systems.  (2)  We  contributed  an  exemplary  application 
that combined both areas and collected data from a pilot 
to draw out its use in a natural setting. 

When  designing  similar  new  applications  the  targeted 
behaviour change doesn’t have to be restricted to physical 
activity. Mutual  monitoring and reverse rewarding could 
intake,  quitting  cigarettes 
also  support  medication 
(Lover’s cups by Chung, Lee, & Selker, 2006) and other 
important  daily  routines.  Encouraged  by  the  positive 
feedback  of  the  case  study,  we  will  refine  the  prototype 
and  investigate  the  different  reward  strategies  of  our 
application  in  a  long-term  study  to  address  questions  as 
such: Is it more motivating to keep things up for another 
person (reverse rewarding) or for one self? Are we more 
engaged in fulfilling duties, when we want to do favours 
to  others  or  when  we  want  to  avoid  being  admonished? 
Do  we  fear  social  disapproval?  Should  rewards  be 
assigned by the distant friend or automatically? 

312

 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  appreciate  our  participants’  effort  and  valuable 
feedback. 

Lakdawalla, D. and Philipson, T. The Growth of Obesity 
and  Technological  Change.  Economics  and  Human 
Biology, 7, 3 (2009), 283-293.  

REFERENCES 
Bakker, S.,  van den  Hoven,  E.  and Eggen, B. Peripheral 
interaction: characteristics and considerations. Personal 
and Ubiquitous Computing, 19, 1 (2015),, 239-254.  

Balaam,  M.,  Fitzpatrick,  G.,  Good,  J.  and  Luckin,  R. 
(2010).  Exploring  affective 
the 
classroom with the subtle stone. In Proc CHI'10, ACM 
Press (2010), 1623-32.  

technologies 

for 

Ballagas,  R.,  Raffle,  H.,  Go,  J.,  Revelle,  G.,  Kaye,  J., 
Ames, M. and Spasojevic, M. Story Time for the 21st 
Century. Pervasive Comp, IEEE, 9, 3 (2010) , 28-36.  

Baskarada,  S.  Qualitative  case  studies  guidelines.  The 

Qualitative Report, 19, 40 (2014), 1-25.  

Li,  I.,  Dey,  A.  and  Forlizzi,  J.  A  stage-based  model  of 
Personal  Informatics  systems.  In  Proc  CHI'10,  ACM 
Press (2010), 557-566. 

Liechti,  O.  and  Ichikawa,  T.  A  digital  photography 
framework  enabling  affective  awareness  in  home 
communication. Personal Tech, 4, 1 (2000), 6-24.  

Lin,  J.,  Mamykina,  L.,  Lindtner,  S.,  Delajoux,  G.  and 
Strub,  H.  Fish’n’Steps:  Encouraging  Physical  Activity 
with  an 
In  Proc 
Interactive  Computer  Game. 
Ubicomp'06, Springer (2006), 261-278. 

Lindley,  S.  Shades  of  lightweight:  supporting  cross-
generational  communication  through  home  messaging. 
Univ Access in the Info Society, 11, 1 (2012), 31-43.  

Chiu,  M.-C.  et  al.    Playful  bottle:  a  mobile  social 
persuasion system to motivate healthy water intake. In 
Proc Ubicomp'09, ACM Press (2009), 185-194.  

Maitland,  J.,  et  al.  H.  Increasing  the  awareness  of  daily 
activity  levels  with  Pervasive  Computing.  In  Proc 
Pervasive Health'06, IEEE (2006). 

Chua, H. F., Ho, S. S., Jasinska, A. J., Polk, T. A., Welsh, 
R.  C.,  Liberzon,  I.  and  Strecher,  V.  J.  Self-related 
neural response to tailored smoking-cessation messages 
predicts quitting. Nat Neurosci, 14, 4 (2011), 426-427.  

Chung,  H.,  Lee,  C.-H.  J.  and  Selker,  T.  Lover's  cups: 
drinking  interfaces  as  new  communication  channels. 
Ext. Abstracts CHI'06, ACM Press (2006), 375-380.  

Consolvo,  S.,  Everitt,  K.,  Smith,  I.  and  Landay,  J.  A. 
Design  requirements  for  technologies  that  encourage 
physical  activity.  In  Proc  CHI06,  ACM  Press  (2006), 
457-66. 

Consolvo,  S.,  McDonald,  D.  W.  and  Landay,  J.  A. 
Theory-driven  design  strategies  for  technologies  that 
support  behavior  change  in  everyday  life.  In  Proc 
CHI'09, ACM Press (2009), 405-414. 

Consolvo,  S.,  et  al.  Activity  sensing  in  the  wild:  a  field 
trial  of  ubifit  garden.  In  Proc  CHI'08,  ACM  Press 
(2008), 1797-1806. 

Fogg,  B.  J.  Persuasive  technology:  using  computers  to 
change  what  we  think  and  do.  Ubiquity,  December 
Issue (2002).  

Gaver,  B.  Provocative  Awareness.  Computer  Supported 

Cooperative Work 11, 3-4 (2002), 475-493. 

Hassenzahl,  M.,  Heidecker,  S.,  Eckoldt,  K.,  Diefenbach, 
S.  and  Hillmann,  U.  All  you  need  is  love:  current 
strategies  of  mediating  intimate  relationships  through 
technology. ACM TOCHI. 19, 4 (2012), 1-19. 

Hekler, E. B., Klasnja, P., Froehlich, J. E. and Buman, M. 
P.  Mind  the  theoretical  gap:  interpreting,  using,  and 
developing behavioral theory  in HCI research. In Proc 
CHI'13, ACM Press (2013), 3307-3316. 

Markopoulos,  P.,  Romero,  N.,  Baren,  J.  v.,  IJsselsteijn, 
W., Ruyter, B. d. and Farshchian, B. Keeping in touch 
with  the  family:  home  and  away  with  the  ASTRA 
awareness  system.  In  Ext.  Abstracts  CHI'04,  ACM 
Press (2004), 1351-4. 

Mueller,  F.  F.,  O'Brien,  S.  and  Thorogood,  A.  Jogging 
together" 
over  a  distance:  supporting  a  "jogging 
experience  although  being  apart.  In  Ext.  Abstracts 
CHI'04, ACM Press (2007), 1998-194. 

Mynatt,  E.  D.,  Rowan,  J.,  Craighill,  S.  and  Jacobs,  A.  
Digital  family  portraits:  supporting  peace  of  mind  for 
extended family members. In Proc CHI'01, ACM Press 
(2001), 333-340. 

Octavia,  J.  R.,  Hoven,  E.  v.  d.  and  Mondt,  H.  D. 
Overcoming  the  distance  between  friends.  In  Proc 
BSC-HCI'07, British Computer Society (2007), 79-82. 

Parker,  A.  Reflection-through-performance:  personal 
implications  of  documenting  health  behaviors  for  the 
collective.  Personal  and  Ubiquitous  Computing,  18,  7 
(2014), 1737-1752.  

Romero,  N.,  Markopoulos,  P.,  van  Baren,  J.,  de  Ruyter, 
B.,  Ijsselsteijn,  W.  and  Farshchian,  B.  Connecting  the 
systems.  Personal  and 
family  with  awareness 
Ubiquitous Computing, 11, 4 (2007), 299-312.  

Rooksby, J., Rost, M., Morrison, A. and Chalmers, M. C. 
Personal tracking as lived informatics. In Proc CHI'14, 
ACM Press (2014), 1163-72. 

and  Gal-Oz,  A.  Deconstructing 
Zuckerman,  O. 
gamification: 
of 
evaluating 
continuous  measurement,  virtual  rewards,  and  social 
comparison  for  promoting  physical  activity.  Personal 
and Ubiquitous Computing, 18, 7 (2014), 1705-1719.  

effectiveness 

the 

313

  
 
 
