Social Fabric Fitness: The Design and Evaluation of 
Wearable E-Textile Displays to Support Group Running 

Matthew Louis Mauriello1, Michael Gubbels2, Jon E. Froehlich1 
Makeability Lab | Human-Computer Interaction Lab 
Department of Computer Science1, College Of Information Studies2 
University of Maryland, College Park 
{mattm401, mgubbels, jonf}@umd.edu 

ABSTRACT 
Group  exercise  has  multiple  benefits  including  greater 
adherence to fitness regimens, increased enjoyment among 
participants, and enhanced workout intensity. While a large 
number  of  technology  tools  have  emerged  to  support  real-
time  feedback  of  individual  performance,  tools  to  support 
group fitness are limited. In this paper, we present a set of 
wearable e-textile displays for running groups called Social 
Fabric  Fitness  (SFF).  SFF  provides  a  glanceable,  shared 
screen  on  the  back  of  the  wearer’s  shirt  to  increase 
awareness and motivation of group fitness performance. We 
discuss  parallel  prototyping  of  three  designs—one  flexible 
e-ink  and  two  flexible  LED-based  displays;  the  selection 
and refinement of one design; and two evaluations—a field 
study of 10 running groups and two case studies of running 
races.  Our  qualitative  findings  indicate  that  SFF  improves 
awareness  of  individual  and  group  performance,  helps 
groups  stay  together,  and  improves  in-situ  motivation.  We 
close with reflections for future athletic e-textile displays. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI). 

INTRODUCTION 
Since  the  1990s,  running  has  experienced  unprecedented 
growth  in  the  US  [25,27].  Although  typically  seen  as  an 
individual  activity,  a  growing  number  of  runners  are 
choosing to run in groups and/or joining running clubs [2]. 
Sports  psychologists  and  coaches  cite  multiple  benefits  of 
group  exercise,  including  greater  adherence  to  exercise 
regimens, increased commitment to reach shared goals, and 
more intense workouts [13,14,24,33]. While a large number 
of  tools  have  emerged  to  support  real-time  feedback  of 
individual  performance  (e.g.,  Runkeeper,  Nike+),  we  are 
unaware  of  work  that  investigates  real-time  tracking  and 
feedback to support collocated group fitness activities.  

In  this  paper,  we  introduce  a  set  of  wearable  electronic 
textile  (e-textile)  displays—called  Social  Fabric  Fitness 
(SFF)—designed  to  increase  performance  awareness  and 
motivation for group fitness (Figure 1). SFF is worn by one 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that  copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full 
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others 
than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, 
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior  specific 
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2014, April 26—May 01 2014, Toronto, ON, Canada 
Copyright 2014 ACM 978-1-4503-2473-1/14/04…$15.00. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557299  

Figure 1: SFF visualize real-time run-tracking information on shared,
glanceable wearable displays to increase group awareness and  fitness
performance. See also the video in our supplementary materials.  

or  two  pace  leaders  in  a  running  group;  the  displays 
wirelessly  communicate  with  the  wearer’s  mobile  phone, 
and  present  real-time  feedback  about  the  group’s  activity 
(e.g., average pace, distance, and duration). Based on work 
in  behavioral  science  related  to  the  motivational  effects  of 
goal-setting  and  public  commitment  [15,26],  SFF  also 
compares  recent  pace  averages  to  a  group-set  target  pace. 
While  a  number  of  projects  in  ubiquitous  computing  and 
HCI  have  focused  on  on-body  sports  sensing  (e.g., 
[6,18,30]),  only  a  few  have  provided  real-time  textile-
mediated  feedback  [16,22].  None  have  explored  a  shared, 
wearable  display  for  runners  aimed  at  enhancing  group 
awareness, cohesiveness, and motivation. 

As  the  first  work  exploring  e-textile  information  displays 
for runners, our research questions are largely exploratory, 
including: what impact, if any, does SFF have on the wearer 
in  terms  of  comfort,  performance,  self-awareness,  and 
mental  affect?  How  does  SFF  impact  the  group  running 
experience—does  it  help  support  group  awareness  and/or 
cohesiveness?  Finally,  how  does  SFF  compare  to  other 
tracking sources (e.g., watch, mobile phone)?  

To examine these questions, we first designed, iterated on, 
and informally evaluated three flexible e-textile prototypes: 
two  LED-based  and  one  e-ink-based.  During  our  iterative 
process, we focused primarily on viewability, comfort, size, 
weight, and display content. We then selected and refined a 
final prototype and performed a field study with 10 running 
groups and two small race case studies. For the field study, 
we  recruited  pre-existing  running  groups  with  at  least  4 
members  to  run  with  two  SFF  prototypes  along  a  regular 

Session: Exergaming for Health and FitnessCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada2833  
 
 
run route of  their  choosing for 30  mins  or longer;  in  total, 
19 wearers and 33 non-wearers participated (N=52). For the 
second study, we evaluated SFF in race environments—an 
8K  trail  run  and  a  10K  road  race  (N=4).  For  both  studies, 
we  collected  data  with  pre-  and  post-study  questionnaires, 
semi-structured post-study interviews, and observations.  

We found that both non-wearers and wearers felt that SFF 
improved  their  awareness  of  their  group’s  performance, 
helped  motivate  them  to  run  at  the  group-set  target  pace, 
and  helped  keep  the  group  together.  Surprisingly,  only  a 
few  wearers  were  concerned  with  publicly  revealing  their 
run  data.  When  asked,  44  of  52  participants  (85%) 
expressed interest in using SFF again (90% of wearers).  

In  summary,  the  contributions  of  this  paper  are:  (i)  an 
exploration of three e-textile designs built to support group 
fitness  activities;  (ii)  findings  from  a  field  study  of  10 
running  groups  and  two  case  studies  of  race  events;  (iii) 
design  reflections  and  directions  for  future  athletic  jerseys 
for  runners  and  other  sports  applications  (e.g.,  bicycling); 
(iv) the idea of and new directions for the reappropriation of 
quantified self systems for co-located shared activities.  

RELATED WORK 
We  discuss  benefits  of  group  exercise  and  sports 
performance  feedback  before  covering  technology  tools  to 
support running and e-textiles for athletics. 

The Benefits of Group Exercise 
Sports  psychologists  and  fitness  coaches  emphasize  that 
exercising  in  groups:  (i)  helps  participants  adhere  to 
training  regimens;  (ii)  provides  educational  benefits  since 
the community can share knowledge on training approaches 
increases  enjoyment  and 
and  athletic  events; 
engagement  in  the  activity  itself;  and  (iv)  aids  training 
intensity  as  group  members  push  each  other  beyond 
preconceived limits [2,5,13,14,24,33]. 

(iii) 

For  point  (iv)  sports  psychologists  often  refer  to  social 
facilitation theories, which posit that the presence of others 
can  increase  a  person’s  general  drive  and  focus  [5,29]. 
Bond  [3]  reframes  this  phenomena  in  terms  of  Goffman’s 
presentation  of  self  [12]  where  the  individual  is  motivated 
to project an image of competence in the presence of others, 
which can have a positive impact on performance. For tasks 
perceived  to  be  too  difficult,  however,  performance  may 
actually  decline  as  the  individual  becomes  self-conscious. 
In relation to SFF, there is a potential dichotomy of effects: 
the  wearer  could  feel  motivated  to  reach  fitness  goals 
because their performance is externalized and viewable, but 
also feel additional pressure or stress impairing them from 
reaching their potential. We explore both in our paper. 

Sports Performance Feedback 
Feedback  is  essential  to  athletic  performance  [1].  Sport 
scientists  distinguish  between 
types  [10,23]:  (i) 
inherent  feedback  from  an  individual’s  own  sensory 
mechanisms  (e.g.,  awareness  of  breathing  rate)  and  (ii) 
augmented feedback from outside sources such as a coach, 

two 

video, or other technology. Augmented feedback—which is 
our  focus—has  multiple  benefits  that  include  helping 
athletes  develop  performance  strategies  (e.g.,  to  conserve 
energy),  providing  motivation,  and  increasing  workout 
intensity  [1,23].  These  effects  are  moderated  by  the 
feedback’s  frequency,  content,  and  concurrency  with  the 
action  itself  (i.e.,  real-time).  Though  research  into  shared 
feedback  systems  is  limited,  Williams  et  al.  found  that 
swimmers  were  faster  in  relays  than  individual  events  but 
only if individual scores were released for each leg [32]. In 
our work, we were interested in investigating whether SFF 
wearers—who provide performance feedback for the entire 
group  via  their  displays—feel  an  increased  sense  of 
responsibility or drive for their group’s performance. 

Tools to Support Running 
With 
the  emergence  of  small,  sensor-rich  devices—
including  watches  and  smartphones—there  has  been  huge 
growth 
(e.g.,  Nike+, 
RunKeeper, and MapMyRun). Although some applications 
support  social  goals,  challenges,  and  sharing  workouts  via 
social  media  they  are  not  designed  for  shared,  collocated 
experiences, which is the intent of SFF. 

run-tracking 

applications 

in 

In  the  HCI  research  community,  there  has  been  similar 
interest  in  tools  to  support  runners,  including  adapting 
music  automatically  to  support  pace  goals  [21],  playing 
auditory  signals  to  improve  running  cadence  [11],  and 
transforming  the  run  into  an  adaptive  fitness  game  [4]. 
However, the focus is on personal tracking and motivation. 
One  exception  is  from  Mueller  et  al.,  who  explored  how 
mobile  technology  can  support  shared jogging  experiences 
between  remote  partners  (e.g.,  partners  are  geographically 
dispersed  but  running  in  synchrony)  [19,20].  Our  work 
shares  the  goal  of  transforming  the  social  experience  of 
running, but, again, we are interested in collocated groups. 
We  also  focus  on  glanceable,  visual  displays  compared  to 
Mueller et al.’s auditory modalities. 

E-Textiles and Sports 
Most  e-textile  athletic  wear  has  focused on data  collection 
with  post-hoc  analysis  by  coaches  and  athletes  rather  than 
an integrated sensing and visualization system (e.g., [7]). A 
few newer systems such as the Adidas miCoach Elite [31] 
and  the  Under  Armour  E39  smart  jersey  [28]  sense  and 
transmit  the  wearer’s  physiological  and  movement  data  in 
is  not 
real-time.  Again,  however, 
integrated  into  the  e-textile. In  contrast,  the  recent  Reebok 
CheckList both senses and visualizes potentially concussive 
hits directly on the helmet [16]. Similarly, SFF senses and 
visualizes a runner’s movement and heart rate on the body 
within an integrated wearable platform.  

the  visualization 

As  a  group-based  e-textile  information  display  for  fitness, 
our  work  is  most  similar  to  Page  and  Vande  Moere’s 
TeamAwear “smart” basketball jerseys [22]. Both SFF and 
TeamAwear surface otherwise latent information on shared 
displays  directly  on  the  athletes  themselves;  however, 
TeamAwear  was  meant  to  help  coordinate  action  and 

Session: Exergaming for Health and FitnessCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada2834(a) Prototype 1: Custom LED matrix on flexible PCB 

(b) Prototype 2: Flexible e-Ink Display by Plastic Logic
Figure 2: We built and informally evaluated three flexible, e-textile prototype displays. The top row describes the displays, the requisite hardware 
including microcontroller and power, and the fabric enclosures. The bottom row highlights the flexibility of the prototypes.  
improve in-game decisions among athletes in a competitive 
sport context. In contrast, SFF is designed to improve group 
awareness,  cohesiveness,  and  motivation.  Further,  their 
evaluation  consisted  of  only  a  15-minute  case  study,  in 
contrast  to  our  evaluations  of  SFF:  a  field  study  with  10 
pre-existing running groups and two case studies. 

Prototype 3: 
Erogear Flex LED 
2 x 3.7V Lithium Ion; 2200 
mAh 
8” x 3” (8” x 6”)  

2 x 3.7V Lithium Ion 
Polymer; 2000 mAh 
8.4 “x 2.4” (8.4” x 4.8”) 

(c) Prototype 3: Flexible LED matrix by Erogear

Power / 
Battery 
Physical 
Dimensions 

Prototype 1:  
Custom Flex LED  

Prototype 2:  
PL Flex e-Ink 

4 x 1.5V AA; 2000 mAh 

8.4 “x 2.4” (8.4” x 4.8”) 

HW Specs 

DESIGN PROCESS AND GOALS 
The construction and design of the SFF display used a three 
stage human-centered, iterative approach. We first designed 
and built lo-fidelity mockups using materials such as fabric, 
foam,  and  Velcro.  Here,  we  were  interested  in  examining 
wearable  attributes  such  as  shape,  size,  and  weight  of 
display.  In  stage  two,  we  built  and  informally  evaluated 
three  interactive  flexible  prototypes  in  parallel  (Figure  2): 
(i)  a  custom  LED  matrix  display;  (ii)  an  electronic  ink  (e-
ink)  display;  and  (iii)  a  second  higher-resolution  LED 
matrix display. Parallel prototyping, which allows designers 
to  compare  and  contrast  design  ideas  during  the  design 
process,  has  recently  received  increased  attention  in  the 
CHI  community  and  has  been  shown  to  produce  diverse, 
high-quality design outcomes (e.g., [9]). In the third stage, 
we selected the best performing prototype and updated our 
final design based on our pilot study results. 

Design  goals.  Our  design  goals  fall  into  four  categories: 
comfort,  display  content,  robustness,  and  overall  user 
experience.  For  comfort,  we  wanted  prototypes  that  were 
lightweight  and  unobtrusive  (i.e.,  that  did  not  physically 
interfere with the wearer’s run). The display content should 
be  real-time,  informative,  and  motivational  as  well  as 
viewable across multiple lighting conditions (e.g., in shade 
or direct sunlight) and legible from a distance (~12m). The 
design should also be  robust to withstand exercise activity 
and  resistance  to  sweat/moisture.  Finally,  for  overall  user 

Thickness  2.85 – 13.47mm 
Flexibility  High 
Resolution  24 x 6 (24 x 12) 

Pixel Density  ~16 ppi 

Color  Single color per panel 

2.78 – 4.86mm 
Medium 
320 x 240 
85 ppi 
Grayscale 

Refresh Rate  5 Hz 

Controller  2 x Arduino Pro Mini 
w/ATmega168 8MHz 
Built into fabric panel 
enclosure 

Controller 
Location 

~1.1 Hz 
BeagleBone w/ custom PL 
display driver 
Connected via extension 
cable & worn on waist 

2.19 – 4.79mm 
High 
32 x 8 (32 x 16) 
~12 ppi 
Single color per panel 
w/65k illumination levels 
38 Hz 
2 x 32-bit MCU, 16-bit 
PWM LED matrix driver 
Built into fabric panel 
enclosure 

Weights 

Battery  61.0 grams 

Controller  24.8 g 

Display*  66.9 g 

Holder (Belt)  N/A 
Interconnects  0.2 g 

Total  152.9 g (0.34 lbs) 

121.6 grams 
127.2 g 

25.4 g 
136.2 g 
1.3 g 
411.7 g (0.91 lbs) 

114.3 grams 
N/A (could not be 
separated from display) 
46.8 g 
N/A 
0.1 g 
161.2 g (0.36 lbs) 

Table 1: Hardware specifications and weights of the three prototypes. 
A precision scale was used (0.1 g rating). *Includes fabric enclosure. 
experience,  our  goal  was  to  design  a  system  that  was  fun, 
enjoyable, and helped support the group run experience.  

THE THREE INTERACTIVE PROTOTYPES 
Here,  we  describe  our  three  interactive  prototypes,  which 
embody different aspects of our design goals (e.g., different 
sizes, weights, display technology, aesthetic qualities, etc.). 

Prototype 1: Custom Flexible LED Matrix 
Our  first  prototype  is  a  custom  LED  matrix  display  made 
from a flexible printed circuit board (PCB). This design was 
the  lightest  of  the  prototypes  (including  all  components), 
had  intermediate  brightness  and  “pixel”  density,  and  the 
lowest resolution (Table 1). As this was the only prototype 

Session: Exergaming for Health and FitnessCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada2835 
 
 
 
 
We sourced a 4.7” monochrome flexible e-ink display with 
a  resolution  of  320x240  (85  ppi)  from  Plastic  Logic.  The 
system  consisted  of  an  “engineering  sample”  display,  a 
BeagleBone  Linux  computer,  and  a  custom  daughterboard 
display  driver.  For  rendering,  we  wrote  a  custom 
application  in  C  to  display  fonts/images.  Unlike  the  other 
prototypes, the hardware components (e.g., microcontroller, 
display  driver)  were  not  integrated  into  the  display. 
Consequently,  this  design  had  two  potential  comfort 
advantages:  without  integrated  hardware,  the  shirt  display 
itself was very lightweight (25.4 g) and the hardware could 
be  moved  to  more  insensitive  load-bearing  parts  of  the 
body.  However,  the  components  themselves  were  heavier 
and required an additional belt (Figures 2b and 3b). 

Prototype 3: Erogear Flexible LED Matrix 
For  our  3rd  prototype,  we  collaborated  with  a  small  e-
textiles  start-up  company,  Erogear  (erogear.com),  who 
provided  us  with  a  set  of  pre-release  flexible  LED  matrix 
displays.  These  displays  are  similar  to  those  described  in 
Prototype 1 except that the Erogear versions have a higher 
resolution  (32x16  per  panel  vs.  24x6),  higher  refresh  rate 
(38Hz vs. 5Hz), contain brighter LEDs, and have a thinner 
profile. To program the displays, we used the Erogear SDK 
for Android, which provides an API to render bitmaps and 
full-motion video in Java (Figures 2c and 3c). 

SFF SYSTEM OVERVIEW 
Though  each  of  our  designs  differed  in  terms  of  display 
technology and hardware platform, the system architecture 
was  the  same:  (i)  smartphone-based  software  that  tracked 
runs and wirelessly transmitted this data over Bluetooth in 
real-time; (ii) an embedded hardware system that processed 
the  data  and  interfaced  with  a  display  controller;  (iii)  the 
display prototype; and (iv) an optional wireless chest-worn 
heart rate monitor by Polar (Figure 4). 

For 
the  run-tracking  software,  we  collaborated  with 
RunKeeper, a company that makes a popular mobile phone-
based  fitness-tracking  application  with  the  same  name. 
RunKeeper developed a custom version of their application 
to  interface  with  our  Android  SFF  software.  This  version 
appeared  to  the  user  as  a  normal  RunKeeper  application, 
but  also  broadcasts  via  Android  intents:  run  information 
(e.g.,  pace,  duration,  distance),  the  runner’s  heart  rate  as 
sensed by the Polar sensor, and user interactions (e.g., start, 

Figure 4: The general system architecture of SFF composed of three 
main components. The wireless heart rate (HR) monitor is optional. 

(a) Prototype 1 

(b) Prototype 2 
Figure  3:  (Top)  The  required  components  of  the  three  prototypes. 
(Middle  rows)  Two  of  the  four  display  screens  along  with  fabric 
enclosures.  Not  shown:  duration  and  distance.  Sizes  are  relative. 
(Bottom) Prototypes in action during our internal pilot studies. 

(c) Prototype 3 

completely constructed in our lab, we also had more control 
over its design and individual components. 

Initially,  we  created  early  versions  of  Prototype  1  with 
breadboards,  LEDs,  and  Arduino  Unos.  With  these  early 
prototypes,  we 
investigated  different  LED  matrix 
configurations,  tested  their  impact  on  brightness  and 
outdoor  viewability,  and  implemented  early  font  sets  and 
visual  feedback  designs.  Because  Arduinos  have  a  limited 
number  of  I/O  pins,  we  used  a 
technique  called 
charlieplexing,  which  takes  advantage of  the  tri-state  logic 
capabilities  of  microcontrollers  to  efficiently  multiplex  the 
output signal (e.g., [8]). Charlieplexing, however, increases 
circuit  complexity,  has  dimmer  visual  output,  and  greater 
susceptibility  to  failure.  After  multiple  iterations,  we 
created a final design with a 24x6 LED matrix. To produce 
the  prototype  used  in  our  pilot  studies,  we  sent  a  custom-
built flexible PCB schematic to outside manufacturing. We 
stitched  two  flexible  PCB  panels  together  (one  blue,  one 
green)—each  driven  by  an  Arduino  Pro  Mini  integrated 
with the enclosure (Figures 2a and 3a).  

Prototype 2: Plastic Logic Flexible e-Ink Prototype 
For  our  2nd  prototype,  we  investigated  flexible  e-ink 
displays  because  of  their  size,  thinness,  weight,  wide-
viewing angles, superior viewability in direct sunlight, and 
low-power  requirements.  In  comparison  to  our  other 
prototypes, this design was the thinnest and offered the best 
outdoor  viewability.  However,  it  also  had  the  smallest 
physical  dimensions—which  affected  viewing  distance—
the  slowest  refresh  rate,  and  no  self-illumination  (i.e.,  it 
could not be seen in low-light conditions). 

Session: Exergaming for Health and FitnessCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada2836 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
stop). Our custom software sniffed these intents, processed 
them, and wirelessly transmitted the running and heart rate 
data  via  Bluetooth  to  the  display’s  embedded  hardware 
system  (which  was  either  integrated  into  the  display  itself 
or linked via a flexible wire; see Figure 3).  

Display screens. All three prototypes auto-rotated through 
four screens: pace, duration, distance, and heart rate. These 
screens represent the key metrics of a run and are used by 
most  run  trackers  (e.g.,  Nike+,  Garmin).  By  virtue  of  the 
wearer running with others, pace, duration, and distance are 
shared  across  the  running  group;  however,  heart  rate  is 
not—it is our sole egocentric measure. We were interested 
in  exploring  how  wearers  would  feel  revealing  their 
physiological  data  and  how  others  in  the  group  would 
respond to seeing another runner’s heart rate. As heart rate 
is correlated to exertion level [17], SFF visualizes how hard 
the wearer is working at the current pace. 

SFF  shirt.  We  explored  three  primary  characteristics:  the 
placement  of  the  display  on  the  back,  the  attachment 
mechanism,  and  how  the  size,  shape,  and  weight  of  the 
display  interacted  with  placement  and  attachment  during 
runs.  While  we  ultimately  envision  an  SFF  jersey  with  a 
seamlessly  integrated  e-textile  display,  we  pursued  a  more 
modular  design  for  our  prototypes.  The  displays  were 
attached using various Velcro configurations. 

PILOT STUDIES AND FINAL DESIGN 
During  the  design  process,  we  performed  11  internal  pilot 
studies  with  members  of  our  lab.  Pilots  were  with  one  to 
four runners; most were with two. Whenever possible, two 
runners  would  wear  a  display.  These  informal  pilots  were 
intermittently  spaced  to  test  new  prototype  iterations  and 
aimed  at:  (i)  determining  how  display  weight,  component 
distribution,  and  placement  affect  running;  (ii)  examining 
the  viewability  of  the  displays  under  different  conditions; 
(iii)  gaining  qualitative  reactions  from  our  participants 
about  the  aesthetics,  function,  and  design  of  the  displays. 
The results were used to select and refine our final design. 

We  quickly  determined  that  even  a  moderately  weighted 
display could pull the shirt neckline uncomfortably against 
the  throat  and  that  the  original  placement—on  the  upper 
backside of the shirt close to the name lettering location on 
professional  sports  jerseys—affected  the  movement  of  the 
runner’s  shoulder  blades.  As  a  result,  we  began  further 
optimizing for weight—including the amount of fabric used 
for  the  enclosures  and  attachment  materials.  We  also 
created  a  Velcro  rail  system  so  that  a  display  could  be 
easily  moved  to  fit  the  runner’s  preference.  Generally,  the 
most  comfortable  placement  was  about  3/5ths  down  the 
back  (opposite  the  sternum).  Based  on  feedback,  we  also 
built protective fabric around the waist-worn battery clips to 
reduce discomfort. Wiring was eventually routed through a 
sleeve in the left Velcro rail so that it was hidden. 

In  terms  of  the  prototypes  themselves,  while  we  were 
initially concerned with the e-ink display’s smaller physical 
dimensions,  we  found  that  the  increased  resolution  was 

in 

true 

conditions 

largely  compensatory.  However,  the  viewing  distance  was 
still  less  than  the  two  LED  matrix  prototypes.  This  was 
especially 
(shadows, 
low-light 
morning/evening  runs).  And,  though  the  e-ink  display  had 
greater viewability in direct sunlight particularly compared 
to  Prototype  1  (the  custom  LED  matrix),  we  found  that 
Prototype  3  (the  Erogear  LED  matrix)  was  sufficiently 
bright  to  work  in  most  lighting  conditions.  In  addition, 
Prototype 3’s large, illuminated lettering was viewable from 
the greatest distance. Of the three colors tested (red, green, 
and blue), green had the best outdoor viewability. 

With  regards  to  comfort,  all  three  prototypes  performed 
well.  The  Velcro  rail  attachment  system  greatly  reduced 
complaints  about  discomfort  from  the  displays.  Most 
criticisms  were  directed  toward  components  worn  at  the 
waist,  especially  for  the  e-ink  prototype,  which  required  a 
running belt to hold components.  

Final SFF System 
Based on our pilot studies, we determined that Prototype 3, 
the  Erogear  display,  had  the  most  potential.  It  was  bright, 
lightweight,  comfortable,  and  had  good  visibility  under 
most  lighting  conditions.  Additionally,  based  on  feedback 
from our pilot participants, we decided to add an additional 
display  screen:  a  social  support  goal-system.  With  this 
feature, a running group decides on a target pace and enters 
it  before  the  run.  The  wearable  display  then  compares  the 
group’s  recent  average  pace  with  the  target  pace  via  a 
moving bar graph visualization (Figure 5). As mentioned in 
the  introduction,  this  feature  was  primarily  aimed  at 
motivating runners to achieve their target pace and remain 
together  as  a  group.  Goal-setting  is  a  well-known  strategy 
in  the  behavioral  and  sports  science  literature  for  training 
[1,15]. And, since the target pace is collectively set by the 
group,  it  serves  as  a  public  commitment  [26]  that  is 
continuously visualized throughout the run. 

FIELD STUDY OF RUNNING GROUPS 
To examine the impact of the final SFF prototype design on 
group  running  dynamics  and  performance,  we  conducted 
two  exploratory  evaluations:  a  field  study  of  ten  running 
groups and two case study deployments in races. 

Field Study Method 
Participants 
Running  groups  were  recruited  via  mailing  lists,  word-of-

Figure 5: The target pace visualization animates across three screens
comparing  the  group’s  average  pace  to  the  target  pace  over  the  last
nine minutes (each bar represents the average pace for one minute). 

Session: Exergaming for Health and FitnessCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada2837mouth,  and  direct  contact  with  running  clubs.  Our 
recruitment material specified that we were looking for pre-
existing running groups of at least 4-10 runners, all over the 
age  of  18,  to  take  part  in  a  study  of  wearable  running 
displays.  Session  slots  were  filled  on  a  first-come,  first-
served basis. Each participant was paid $20 for their time. 

We recruited eleven groups; the first served as an external 
pilot (their results are not reported here). The remaining ten 
groups  had  a  total  of  52  participants  (35  female)  with  an 
average  age  of  42  (SD=14.69).  See  Table  2.  The  average 
group  size  was  5.2  (SD=1.87)—87%  participants  reported 
running  at  least  occasionally  with  their  respective  group. 
Professions varied from graphic designer to chief financial 
officer; 12 were students and four reported no employment 
(e.g., retired). Participants had active lifestyles: 50 out of 52 
(96%) reported working out once a week or more.  

In terms of group running and run tracking behavior, 43 out 
of  52  participants  (82.6%)  reported  that  they  ran  at  least 
occasionally  with  one  or  more  other  people  (24  stated 
include 
almost  every 
run).  The 
socialization,  motivation, 
fun. 
Participants  reported  their  typical  running  group  size  as 
avg=6.4 (Median=5, SD=6.94). Most participants reported 
tracking their runs (92%); 71% do so almost every run. The 
most  popular  tracking  tools  included  Garmin  watches 
(40%), followed by a tie between the Nike+ and RunKeeper 
(19%); 11 participants (21%) reported using pen and paper.  

reasons  provided 
accountability, 

and 

Procedure 
Each  running  group  was  sent  an  informational  flyer,  a 
consent  form,  and  the  pre-study  questionnaire  in  advance. 
Upon arrival at the study session, participants were greeted 
by  one  or  two  research  assistants  who  handed  out 
clipboards  with  the  aforementioned  materials.  The  consent 
process and pre-study questionnaire took approximately ten 
minutes.  Afterward,  we  demonstrated  the  SFF  system 
including  each  display  screen.  If  the  group  did  not  have 
regular  pace  leaders,  we  asked  for  two  volunteers  to  wear 
the  SFF  system,  including  the  shirt,  display,  battery  pack, 
heart  rate  monitor,  Android  phone,  and  armband.  Wearers 
were  also  asked  if  they  would  like  to  disable  any  of  the 
display screens (e.g., heart rate, distance). All declined. 

Before the run, each group was asked to collectively decide 
on a target pace, which was entered into the SFF software 
on  both  wearers’  phones.  Our  aim  here  was  not  to  study 
whether  SFF  enabled  groups  to  reach  their  goals—a 
different, more controlled study design would be necessary 
here—but  rather  to  qualitatively  examine  the  perceived 
benefits  and/or  limitations  of  SFF  on  the  group  running 
experience.  Groups  were  asked  to  run  for  at  least  30 
minutes. We also explained that a research assistant would 
follow  the  group  from  a  distance  on  a  bicycle  in  case  of 
technology failure or emergency. All participants, including 
the wearers, were welcome to use their own trackers as well 
during the study (although unfortunately we did not collect 
precise  data  on  this).  After  the  run,  the  wearers  and  non-

Group 
ID 

# of Participants 
(Females) 

Avg  
Age 

Study Target 
Pace (per mi) 

Study Run 
Distance (mi) 

Study Run  
Time 

G1 
G2 
G3 
G4 
G5 
G6 
G7 
G8 
G9 
G10 
AVG 
Table 2: Demographics and run data from the 10 field study groups. 

00:35:03 
00:34:41 
00:32:12 
00:38:46 
00:34:53 
00:58:28 
00:32:18 
00:31:35 
00:44:43 
00:31:00 
00:36:04 

10:20 
11:30 
08:30 
10:15 
09:00 
10:30 
12:00 
10:30 
09:45 
10:00 
10:14 

4 (4) 
6 (4) 
4 (0) 
4 (4) 
4 (0) 
8 (5) 
9 (9) 
5 (5) 
4 (2) 
4 (2) 
5 (3) 

3.04 
3.12 
3.99 
3.34 
2.93 
5.29 
2.98 
3.02 
4.42 
2.49 
3.46 

31.0 
50.0 
21.2 
49.2 
20.7 
54.2 
47.1 
43.6 
43.0 
22.0 
40.7 

wearers  were  provided  with 
separate  post-study 
questionnaires,  which  took  ~12  minutes  to  complete.  We 
also  recorded  informal  verbal  comments  during  this  time. 
Though our target study session length was 60 minutes, this 
varied depending on run length. 

trailing 

research 

assistant 

Data and Analysis 
In summary, our data includes responses from the pre- and 
post-study questionnaires, verbal comments  made after the 
run, and pictures captured at 2-3 points during each run by 
the 
(Figure  6).  Both 
questionnaires  included  Likert  scale  questions  and  short 
open-form responses. The pre-study questionnaire gathered 
data about demographics, exercise routines, running habits, 
and  use  of  run-tracking  tools.  As  noted  above,  different 
post-study questionnaires were provided to the wearers and 
non-wearers. Both questionnaires  included questions  about 
the  perceived 
impact  of  SFF  on  motivation,  group 
cohesiveness, mental affect, group- and self-awareness, and 
questions  about  the  display.  The  wearer questionnaire  also 
asked how wearing the SFF system affected the participant 
physically and mentally. As an exploratory study, we report 
on descriptive statistics indicating trends in our data, which 
are contextualized with participant quotes.  

Field Study Results 
For Likert questions, unless otherwise specified we used 7-
point  agreement  scales  ordered  strongly  disagree  (1)  to 
strongly agree (7); 4 was neutral. We report means (M=X) 
and standard deviation (SD=X). Due to a dead battery, one 
group  (G8)  ran  with  only  one  display.  Thus,  we  had  19 
wearers  and  33  non-wearers.  We  use  group  ‘G’  and 
participant ‘P’ to refer directly to a participant. Wearers are 
indicated with a ‘-W’ suffix (e.g., G1P1-W). 

in  providing 

feedback  about 

Reactions to Visual Content 
Overall  screen  preferences.  Most  participants  found  the 
displays  useful 
their 
performance. In terms of the individual screens themselves, 
participants  ranked  the  order  of  importance  of  each  screen 
from  ‘1’  to  ‘5’  (‘1’  was  most  important)  on  two  criteria: 
helping them meet the target group pace and most valuable 
overall. For both aspects, average pace was ranked as most 
useful  followed  by  distance  and  duration  (Table  3).  For 
example: 
“The pace and distance helped motivate me more to reach the 
goal time; other displays were just nice to have.” (G10P1-W) 

Session: Exergaming for Health and FitnessCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada2838(a) G4 (N=4) 
Figure 6: We conducted field trials of SFF with 10 running groups; a subset is shown above. See Table 2. 

(b) G9 (N=4) 

(c) G6 (N=8) 

(d) G2 (N=6) 

(e) G7 (N=9) 

“Pace is important to keep me on track but duration is next to 
important  because  it  tells  me  how  much  time  I  have  left  to 
reach my goal.” (G10P2-W) 
While we developed the target pace visualization (Figure 5) 
specifically  to  help  group  members  reach  their  goal,  most 
found it confusing or unnecessary—as they could mentally 
compare  the  average  pace  screen  with  their  goal  pace: 
“[The]  graph  was  hard  to  read  and  get  value  out  of.” 
(G3P4).  One  participant  (G6P2-W)  commented  that  the 
SFF  system  did  not  incorporate  running  up  or  down  hills, 
which  impacts  pace.  Unsurprisingly,  the  heart  rate  screen 
was deemed least important as represented by G4P4: “I am 
not concerned about someone else’s heart rate.” 

Importance for Helping 
Meet Target Pace 
Average Pace 
Distance 
Duration 
Pace Visualization 
Heart Rate 

Avg. Rank 
(SD) 
1.3 (0.83) 
2.5 (0.9) 
3.1 (0.8) 
3.9 (1.3) 
4.3 (1.0) 

Importance in Providing 
Useful Run Feedback 
Average Pace 
Distance 
Duration 
Heart Rate 
Pace Visualization 

Avg. Rank 
(SD) 
1.5 (0.8) 
2.2 (0.9) 
3.1 (0.8) 
3.9 (1.1) 
4.3 (1.1) 

Table 3: Results of participants rank ordering the display screens. 

in 

their 

responses. 

SFF vs. other run-trackers. Although we did not explicitly 
ask  participants  to  compare  SFF  to  their  experiences  with 
other run tracker applications, many participants drew these 
Interestingly,  even 
comparisons 
participants using their own tracking applications during the 
study found value in the display: 
 “It  was  fun  having  the  display  and  being  able  to  see  it  on 
someone [rather] than [on] my wrist app.” (G1P3)  
“Was looking at it instead of my Garmin.” (G6P5) 
Others specifically mentioned how the SFF display offered 
a common, shared screen and that this changed the dynamic 
of the information: 
“I  assumed  my  phone  app  was  sufficient  but  this  added  an 
extra challenge with the group.” (G1P3) 
“Most [of us] use Garmin for tracking, this introduced a shared 
screen vs. independent watching; this felt very novel” (G4P4) 
Still,  some  questioned  whether  SFF  offered  significant 
value over watch or smartphone applications that provided 
the same information: “maybe not useful to the run if you’re 
used to using them [other technology]” (G4P4).   

Enjoyment/fun.  All  of  the  wearers  (N=19)  reported 
enjoying  wearing  the  display,  rating  it  on  average  5.2 
(SD=0.9) on a 7-pt scale. Reasons included making the run 

more fun, social, and motivational (e.g., G9P1-W: "I think 
it  is  useful  and  made  the  run  fun.").  A  number  of 
participants  mentioned  that  SFF  prompted  group  members 
to  “call  out”  information  when  it  was  displayed:  “The 
display encouraged me to meet my goals because everyone 
read the information to me.” (G1P2-W). 

Awareness and Motivation 
Motivation.  A  majority  of  participants  (65%)  agreed  that 
SFF motivated them to run at or faster than the target group 
pace.  The  average  agreement  rating  was  4.8  (SD=1.7). 
Reasons included increased determination and focus: 
 “Motivated me to go faster than the pace displayed.” (G7P7)  
“Made  me  feel  like  I  was  pushing  my  efforts,  which  is  good. 
Challenged myself.” (G7P8) 
Interestingly, a number of wearers cited additional reasons 
such as feelings of accountability and pressure to perform: 
“It made me feel that I had a responsibility to run a target 
pace for the group” (G3P2-W). One non-wearer also stated 
that  she  “felt  more  stress  to  perform”  (G9P5).  For  those 
participants  that  did  not  feel  increased  motivation  (N=18) 
common  reasons  included  feeling  little  difference  from  a 
normal  run,  feeling  distracted  by  the  displays,  and/or  not 
seeing value over personal run trackers. 
Group cohesiveness. A majority of participants (62%) felt 
that  the  display  motivated  the  group  to  stay  together.  The 
average  agreement  rating  was  4.8  (SD=1.5).  G3P3,  for 
example, noted: “Yes, it was different. It made me want to 
keep  up  with  the  others.”  However,  11  participants  (21%) 
disagreed, most often because they felt no difference. 
Performance  awareness.  Participants  reported  feeling 
more  aware  of  both  their  individual  performance  (M=5.1; 
SD=1.7)  as  well  as  the  group’s  performance  (M=5.2; 
SD=1.5).  As  G2P2-W  stated:  “It  made  me  more  aware  of 
our  pacing  and  kept  me  more  focused  on  the  run  itself...” 
Again, those who disagreed (N=7 for individual awareness; 
N=6 for group) commonly felt no difference. 

Wearers Only: Self-Consciousness and Comfort 
We also asked the 19 wearers about the physical and mental 
impact of the display.  

Self-consciousness.  Overall,  wearers  did  not  feel  self-
conscious wearing the display or in revealing their running 
data  to  their  group  or  onlookers  (e.g.,  from  passing  cars, 
others  on  the  run  route).  When  asked  about  feeling  self-

Session: Exergaming for Health and FitnessCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada2839 
conscious, most wearers disagreed (M=2.7; SD=0.4—recall 
that 1 is strongly disagree); for example, “Yes, I expected to 
feel  more  conspicuous;  didn’t  really  mind  it.”  (G2P2-W). 
However, five wearers did feel self-conscious, one of whom 
indicated that it was because of insecurity regarding pace. 

Relatedly,  we  specifically  asked  about  comfort  level  in 
revealing heart rate, the  most personal metric, vs. all other 
running  data  to  two  audiences:  the  running  group  and  to 
coincident  onlookers.  Generally,  wearers  were  not 
concerned about either although heart rate data did seem to 
cause  slightly  more  tension.  Only  two  wearers  (G1P1-W, 
G6P1-W)  reported  feeling  uncomfortable  revealing  their 
heart rate to both audiences. In addition, G6P1-W reported 
discomfort revealing the other running data to her group.  

Physical  comfort.  Most  wearers  did  not  find  the  SFF 
display  or  the  requisite  components  physically  obtrusive 
during the run. Each component was rated individually on a 
7-Point Likert scale (7 is best). The battery pack was rated 
most  comfortable  (M=5.5,  SD=2.1)  followed  by  the  e-
textile  display  (M=5.2,  SD=2.1),  the  HR  monitor  (M=5.1, 
SD=2.0),  and  then  the  armband  and  phone  (M=4.0, 
SD=2.1).  When  first 
introduced,  most  wearers  were 
concerned  with  the  number  of  required  items;  however, 
after the run, these concerns abated: 
“I  thought  it  would  be  uncomfortable;  it  turned  out  to  be 
unnoticed.” (G5P2-W) 
“Arm band is heavy; other [equipment] was fine; cotton t-shirt 
is uncomfortable.” (G2P1-W) 

This  latter  quote  represents  a  common  feeling  about  the 
armband, especially for those not used to running with any 
equipment.  Additionally,  as  most  of  our  study  sessions 
occurred in temperatures of 80-90F (27-35C), the cotton t-
shirt was also a common complaint. Women, in particular, 
requested  a  “synthetic  performance”  shirt;  we  created  one 
and made it available after the sixth study session. This was 
preferred in later sessions. 

Summary of Field Study Results 
In summary, our field study participants enjoyed SFF: they 
reported  feeling  more  aware  of  their  own  performance  as 
well as the group’s performance, and felt motivated to reach 
the group-set target pace. Interestingly, as Bond’s [3] self-
presentation  theory  would  suggest,  some  wearers  felt 
increased pressure to perform and two reported discomfort 
revealing  their  heart  rate  to  others.  Still,  however,  a  large 
majority  of  participants  indicated  interest  in  wearing  SFF 
again (85% overall and 90% of wearers). 

CASE STUDIES: TWO SFF RACE DEPLOYMENTS 
To examine the impact of SFF on runners in a race context, 
we conducted two case study deployments: an 8K race with 
189  runners  and  a  10K  race  with  364  runners.  Races  are 
unique because racers start together in mass and then break 
organically  into  pace  groups.  Four  new  participants  (3 
male) were recruited from those who had responded to our 
initial  field  study  advertisement  (Table  4;  Figure  8).  Our 

(a) R1P1 waiting for race to start 

(b) R2P1 races by 

Figure 8: Four racers participated in our case studies; 2 shown above. 

case  study  procedures  were  similar  to  the  field  study  with 
slightly  modified  pre-  and  post-study  questionnaires  (e.g., 
removed  group  running  questions,  added  race-specific 
questions).  In  addition,  these  participants  did  not  run  with 
their  own  running  groups  but  with  fellow  racers.  All 
participants ran at different speeds; thus, they could not see 
each  other’s  displays.  Below,  we  briefly  summarize  the 
results that intersect with the field study before emphasizing 
new themes that emerged. 

Part. ID 
R1P1 
R1P2 
R2P1 
R2P2 

Race 
County 8K 
County 8K 
Labor Day Classic 
Labor Day Classic 

Age 
34 
33 
26 
18 

 Gender  Target Pace  Distance  Time 
29:30.0 
41:13.0 
22:45.2* 
55:38.6 

6:15 
8:20 
7:45 
8:30 

8K 
8K 
5K 
10K 

M 
F 
M 
M 

Table  4:  Case  study  participants  for  our  two  race  deployments. 
*R2P1 took 1st place in his division while wearing SFF. 

Summary  of  results.  There  were  no  major  differences  in 
the racers’ preferences for the display screens compared to 
the  field  study.  Similarly,  all  participants  felt  that  SFF 
motivated them to perform. For example, R2P1 stated “[it] 
made  me  want  to  run  faster  because  my  performance  was 
on  display”  and  R1P2  reported  feeling  “slightly  more 
pressure  to  perform.”  R2P2  participant  noted  feeling  self-
conscious  about  their  “performance  being  shared  with 
others  (strangers).”  This  same  participant  also  felt 
concerned about what other racers thought of his pace.  

Race-specific  results.  Participants  enjoyed  how  SFF 
increased their interactions with racers and race volunteers. 
For example: “The finish line announcer saw me and read 
out my Heart Rate, 192, as I crossed.” (R1P1). Indeed, all 
participants  mentioned 
that  SFF  elicited  excitement, 
curiosity,  and  encouraging  reactions  from  other  racers  and 
race watchers: 
“I interacted with about 6-7 people, all of which gave positive 
response. They mentioned how the information was motivating 
them  to  run  faster  than  me.  A  lot  of  people  made  comments 
such  as  ‘that's  cool’  or  encouraging  comments—which 
motivated me.” (R2P2) 
After the races, a number of racers approached the research 
team  and  explained  that  they  thought  the  information  was 
useful  during  the  run  emphasizing  that  it  was  helpful  to 
have  a  “pacer”  during  the  race.  Another  participant 
commented that a fellow racer passed him mentioning that 
“it was like a car dashboard [for running].” At both events, 
race  organizers  expressed  interest  in  SFF.  One  organizer 
repeatedly  asked  if  he  could  use  SFF  prototypes  for  the 
official pacers in an upcoming marathon. 

Session: Exergaming for Health and FitnessCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada2840 
Summary of Case Study Results 
In contrast to the field study, wearers in our case studies did 
not run with a pre-existing group but instead a large group 
of  racers.  Although  the  wearers  could  not  see  their  own 
display (or the display of another wearer), they still reported 
increased  motivation  to  perform.  All  participants  were 
particularly  enthusiastic  with  how  it  increased  social 
interactions  during  the  race;  they  also  felt  like  they  were 
providing an informational service to other racers. 

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
As  the  first  paper  exploring  shared,  wearable  feedback 
displays  for  group  fitness  performance,  we  found  support 
for  the  motivational  properties  of  SFF,  both  in  terms  of 
encouraging  runners  to  meet  their  group’s  target  pace  and 
to  stay  together  as  a  group.  Wearers  and  non-wearers  also 
reported feeling more aware of their performance as well as 
that  of  the  group.  However,  more  controlled  studies  are 
necessary  to  determine  if  there  is  an  actual  performance 
impact rather than simply a perceived impact.  

Limitations 
As with any study, there are limitations. First, groups only 
used  SFF  on  one  occasion  and,  thus,  could  be  reacting  to 
the  novelty  of  the  system.  Second,  our  participants  may 
have been susceptible to observation biases. Just as Bond’s 
theory  [3]  would  predict,  the  presence  of  the  research 
assistant—and the staging of the study itself—may  impact 
behavior,  particularly  performance,  which  is  exactly  what 
we explored here. Despite these limitations, we believe SFF 
shows 
the  promise  of  a  new  domain  of  work—
reappropriating personal tracking data for collocated group 
fitness  activities.  Future  work  should  explore 
the 
longitudinal impact of SFF on group behavior and/or more 
controlled  experiments 
textile 
displays to other forms of feedback.  

to  compare  glanceable 

Design Reflections and Future Work 
Motivational  Properties  of  Group  Feedback  Displays. 
The bar graph visualization depicting current vs. goal pace 
was intended to motivate runners to meet their target pace, 
but  many  participants  found  it  confusing.  Instead,  the 
practice  of  collectively  agreeing  on  a  target  pace  at  the 
beginning  of  the  run  along  with  real-time  pace  feedback 
seemed  to  sufficiently  motivate  participants.  More  work  is 
necessary  to  uncover  how  group  goals  can  be  better 
supported through the wearable displays themselves. 

Without prompting, a number of participants mentioned the 
desire  to  have  words  of  encouragement  in  SFF,  such  as 
‘good  job’  or  ‘keep  going’.  One  participant  also  proposed 
using  tortoise  and  rabbit  symbols  to  depict  the  group’s 
speed, along with jokes. These comments suggest not only 
that adding encouraging messages would be useful, but also 
that  playfulness  and  fun  are  important  attributes  of  a 
workout that could be supported by the technology.   

Comfort. We had initially planned to position the displays 
across  the  upper  part  of  the  back,  which  was  aesthetically 
pleasing  (i.e.,  where  jersey  lettering  is  located).  Pilot 

Figure 9: Our original SFF shirt 
design (left) had a statically 
positioned attachment on the 
upper-back. Our final prototype 
(right) used a Velcro rail system 
that allowed more flexible 
placement. Most participants 
preferred the mid-lower back.  

participants,  however,  reported  that  this  location  was 
uncomfortable.  Our  final  design  had  a  Velcro  rail  system 
that allowed flexible placement; most participants preferred 
the  lower  back  (Figure  9).  As  well,  although  participants 
welcomed  the  switch  from  cotton  t-shirts  to  performance 
fabric,  the  synthetic  material  was  far  lighter  and  more 
sensitive  to  the  additional  weight  of  SFF.  At  46.8  grams, 
the  Erogear  display  was  already  quite  light,  but  we 
speculate that its weight would need to be 10-20% lower to 
integrate well with the lighter fabric. Finally, though many 
participants  were  suspect  of  wearing  additional  equipment 
during their runs, these impressions were abated by actually 
running  with  the  system.  Regardless,  limiting  the  amount 
and weight of equipment is an important future goal. 

Pressure to Perform. As Bond’s self-presentation framing 
of  social  facilitation  theory  would  predict  [3],  we  found 
evidence  that  some  runners  felt  additional  pressure  to 
perform  with  SFF.  Surprisingly,  however,  only  a  small 
number of wearers were uncomfortable revealing their heart 
rate  or  pace.  More  work  is  necessary  to  identify  why 
participants  reacted  differently  and  to  examine  potential 
correlates  such  as  personality  factors,  runner’s  self-image 
and  fitness  level.  In  addition,  we  expected  but  did  not  see 
differences  between  revealing  performance  information  to 
the group vs. other runners on the trail. This is somewhat in 
contrast to our own experiences with SFF. 

Though  SFF  was  designed  for  group  contexts,  we  often 
wore  the  displays  ourselves  for  individual  runs  to  assess 
comfort and to test our prototypes. Interestingly, we all felt 
increased pressure to perform because of the externalization 
of  our  activity.  If  a  fellow  (random)  runner  passed,  we 
knew  that  s/he  had  seen  our  statistics.  With  SFF,  it  was 
harder for us to self-rationalize, such as, “I must have been 
running for a longer period than the person that passed me 
by”  or  “I  just  slowed  down  briefly.”  The  truth  of  such 
statements  was  now  readily  apparent,  which  made  an 
ordinarily relaxing run into a stressful one. This feeling of 
exposure  and  self-consciousness  points  to  an  avenue  of 
research  investigating  the  boundaries  of  reappropriating 
personal  tracking  data  for  public-facing  applications  and 
how these boundaries change across deployment contexts. 

SFF  in  Race  Deployments.  We  believe  SFF  has  many 
potential  applications  in  races.  For  example,  a  number  of 
participants  mentioned  that  official  race  ‘pace  leaders’ 
could wear SFF. SFF could also support Twitter integration 
so  that  friends  and  family  could  send  supportive  messages 
to the wearer and runners around them. Finally, SFF could 
show  positional  information  (e.g.,  8th  place)  and  update  it  
throughout the race.  

Session: Exergaming for Health and FitnessCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada2841 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, this paper contributes new knowledge to two 
rapidly  growing  areas:  personal-tracking  (e.g.,  Quantified 
Self) and wearables. Through parallel prototyping, iterative 
design,  and our  exploratory field  studies, we  demonstrated 
the  potential  of  using  shared,  glanceable  displays  to 
motivate individual and group fitness performance, increase 
group  cohesiveness,  and  enhance  group  awareness.  Future 
work  should  investigate  fully  integrated  jersey  displays, 
new  types  of  visual  content  and  motivational  strategies 
(e.g., encouragement), and the use of shared, glanceable e-
textile displays in other athletic contexts (e.g., bicycling).  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
We  thank  Runkeeper  and  Erogear  for  their  technical 
partnerships,  Jonah  Chazan  for  help  developing  fonts,  and 
our participants. This project was funded in part by Nokia. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Anshel, M.H. Sport Psychology: From Theory to Practice 

(5th Edition). Benjamin Cummings, 2011. 

2.  Barder, O. and Knight, D. Running for Fitness. 2010. 
3.  Bond, C.F. Social facilitation: A self-presentational view. 

J. Person. & Soc. Psych. 42, 6 ('82), 1042–1050. 

4.  Buttussi, F. and Chittaro, L. Smarter Phones for Healthier 
Lifestyles: An Adaptive Fitness Game. IEEE Pervasive 
Computing 9, 4 (2010), 51–57. 

5.  Carron, A. V., Hausenblas, H.A., and Mack, D. Social 

influence and exercise: A meta-analysis. Journal of Sport 
& Exercise Psychology 18, 1 (1996), 1–16. 

6.  Chi, E.H., Song, J., and Corbin, G. “Killer App” of 

wearable computing. Proc. UIST'04, 277. 

7.  Connaghan, D., Hughes, S., May, G., et al. A Sensing 

Platform for Physiological and Contextual Feedback to 
Tennis Athletes. Workshop on Wearable & Implantable 
BSNs 2009, 224–229. 

8.  Cornelius, R. Controlling 20 LEDs From 5 Arduino Pins 

Using Charlieplexing. instructables.com, 2011.  

9.  Dow, S.P., Glassco, A., Kass, J., Schwarz, M., Schwartz, 
D.L., and Klemmer, S.R. Parallel prototyping leads to 
better design results, more divergence, & increased self-
efficacy. ACM TOCHI'10 17, 4, 1–24. 

10. Eriksson, M., Halvorsen, K.A., and Gullstrand, L. 

Immediate effect of visual and auditory feedback to control 
the running mechanics of well-trained athletes. Journal of 
Sports Sciences 29, 3 (2011), 253–262. 

11. Fortmann, J., Pielot, M., et al. PaceGuard: improving 

running cadence by real-time auditory feedback. Proc. of 
MobileHCI’12, 5. 

12. Goffman, E. The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. 

Anchor, 1959. 

13. Hanc, J. Run Together. Runner’s World, 2005. 

http://www.runnersworld.com/workouts/run-together. 
14. Kolata, G. To Train Harder, Consider a Crowd. The New 

York Times, 2009.  

15. Locke, E.A. and Latham, G.P. Building a Practically 
Useful Theory of Goal Setting and Task Motivation. 
American Psychologist 57, 9 (2002), 705–717. 

16. Luna, T. Mass. companies team up to prevent head injuries. 

The Boston Globe, 2013. http://goo.gl/VkVLWF. 

17. Mayo Clinic. Exercise intensity: Why it matters, how it’s 

measured. Mayo Clinic Health Information, 2011. 
http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/exercise-
intensity/SM00113. 

18. Michahelles, F. & Schiele, B. Sensing and Monitoring 

Professional Skiers. IEEE Perv. Comp 4, 3 (2005), 40–46. 

19. Mueller, F., Vetere, F., Gibbs, M.R., Edge, D., 

Agamanolis, S., and Sheridan, J.G. Jogging over a distance 
between Europe and Australia. UIST'10, 189. 

20. O’Brien, S. and Mueller, F. “Floyd.” Jogging the distance. 

CHI  ’07, 523–526. 

21. Oliver, N. and Flores-Mangas, F. MPTrain. Proc. 

MobileHCI  ’06, 21. 

22. Page, M. and Vande Moere, A. Evaluating a Wearable 

Display Jersey for Augmenting Team Sports Awareness. 
Pervasive Computing '07, 91–108. 

23. Pérez, P., Llana, S., Brizuela, G., and Encarnación, A. 
Effects of three feedback conditions on aerobic swim 
speeds. J.Sports Science & Medicine 8, 1 (2009), 30–36. 
24. Robbins, L. The Benefits of Group Running. The New York 

Times, 2009. http://well.blogs.nytimes.com/ 
2009/06/25/the-benefits-of-group-running/. 

25. Running USA. 2013 State of the Sport – Part II: Running 

Industry Report. 2013. http://www.runningusa.org/state-of-
sport-2013-part-II. 

26. Schienker, B.R., Dlugolecki, D.W., and Doherty, K. The 
Impact of Self-Presentations on Self-Appraisals and 
Behavior: The Power of Public Commitment. Personality 
& Social Psychology 20, 1 (1994), 20–33. 

27. Sports & Fitness Industry Association (SFIA). Fitness, 

Family, and Social Activities Drive Sports Participation. 
http://www.sfia.org/press/133_Fitness,-Family,-&-Social-
Activities-Drive-Sports-Participation. 

28. Stack, K. NFL Prospects to Wear Smart, Data Gathering 

Workout Shirt. Gizmodo, 2011. 
http://gizmodo.com/5769728/nfl-prospects-to-wear-smart-
data-gathering-under-armour-shirt. 

29. Strauss, B. Social facilitation in motor tasks: a review of 

research and theory. Psychology of Sport and Exercise 3, 3 
(2002), 237–256. 

30. Strohrmann, C., Harms, H., Tröster, G., Hensler, S., and 
Müller, R. Out of the lab and into the woods: kinematic 
analysis in running using wearable sensors. Proc. UbiComp 
'11, 119–122. 

31. Vazquez, S. Adidas miCoach Elite System Provides 

Trainers and Players With Real-Time Performance Metrics. 
Sport Techie, 2013. http://goo.gl/qECxs3. 

32. Williams, K.D., Nida, S.A., Baca, L.D., and Latane, B. 

Social Loafing and Swimming: Effects of Identifiability on 
Individual and Relay Performance of Intercollegiate 
Swimmers. Basic & Appl. Soc. Psych 10, 1 ('89), 73–81. 
33. Youngren, J. Next-Level Training: Club or Coach. Running 

Times, 2009. http://www.runnersworld.com/ race-
training/next-level-training-club-or-coach.  

Session: Exergaming for Health and FitnessCHI 2014, One of a CHInd, Toronto, ON, Canada2842