UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

Social (Media) Jet Lag: How Usage of Social Technology
Can Modulate and Reﬂect Circadian Rhythms

Elizabeth L. Murnane, Saeed Abdullah, Mark Matthews, Tanzeem Choudhury, Geri Gay
{elm236, sma249, mark.matthews, tanzeem.choudhury, gkg1} @ cornell.edu
Information Science, Cornell University

ABSTRACT
By nature, we are circadian creatures whose bodies’ biologi-
cal clocks drive numerous physiological, mental, and behav-
ioral rhythms. Simultaneously, we are social beings. Accord-
ingly, our internal circadian timings experience interference
from externally determined factors such as work schedules
and social engagements, and digital connectivity imports ad-
ditional social constraints that can further misalign our indi-
vidual body clocks. Misalignment between biological and so-
cial time causes social jet lag [50], which has serious physical
and mental health consequences. It particularly impacts our
sleep processes and neurobehavioral functioning. Examin-
ing the interplay between biological rhythms and technology-
mediated social interactions, we ﬁnd that technology may
both modulate and reﬂect circadian rhythms. We also lever-
age such social-sensor data to infer sleep-related behaviors
and disruptions and to analyze variations in attention, cog-
nitive performance, and mood following (in)adequate sleep.
We conclude with recommendations for designing technolo-
gies attuned to our innate biological traits.

Author Keywords
Circadian Rhythms, Sleep, Social Computing

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
J.3 Life and Medical Sciences: Health

INTRODUCTION
Within our bodies there are hundreds of biological clocks co-
ordinated by a “master clock” in our brain. These body clocks
drive our circadian rhythms – biological processes that follow
a roughly 24-hour cycle – and inﬂuence mental and physi-
cal functioning such as our mood, concentration, digestion,
and sleep-wake patterns [25]. The biochemical processes re-
sponsible for sleep speciﬁcally are inﬂuenced by two oppos-
ing mechanisms: a circadian oscillator that promotes wake-
fulness during the day and the body’s homeostatic system
that increases sleep need the longer one is awake [7]. How-
ever, socially determined factors can disrupt internal rhythms,

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
UbiComp ’15, September 7–11, 2015, Osaka, Japan.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3574-4/15/09...$15.00.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2807522

843

leading to considerable disparity between our internal and ex-
ternal timing systems. For instance, an early type (“early
bird”) may stay up later than she would naturally due to
evening social schedules shaped by late types but then be
driven by her biological clock to wake up early, while stan-
dard work schedules may cause a late type (“night owl”) who
falls asleep later to be woken too early during her biological
night [42]. The result for many people is markedly different
sleep and activity patterns on work days versus free days [45].

Given that these demands manifest in sleep and wake ﬂuctu-
ations that are comparable to jet lag, this discrepancy is re-
ferred to as social jet lag since the causes are social in na-
ture [50]. Unlike the transient misalignments of jet lag from
travel, however, social jet lag can be chronic throughout adult
life.
It can also lead to a number of serious illnesses such
as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, obesity, and cancer [25];
and circadian disruption has a strong association with mental
health conditions including bipolar disorder and depression
[16]. For younger individuals, social jet lag can also increase
the risk of using drugs and alcohol [46, 50] as well as result
in cognitive impairments and learning deﬁcits [9].

Practically speaking, sleep pathologies indicative of circadian
misalignment are reaching epidemic levels. According to the
U.S. Centers for Disease Control (CDC), sleep disorders af-
fect 50-70 million people in the U.S. alone, and the annual di-
rect and indirect costs of treating sleep-related problems are
estimated at $14 billion and $150 billion, respectively [32].
Shift work and school schedules have been the commonly
studied main culprits of social jet lag [21, 36]. Recently, so-
cial demands have also begun emanating from the increas-
ingly widespread use of digital technologies. The large scale
personal and societal level disruptions may therefore also be
explained by this ever increasing adoption of personal devices
and information technologies that implant an ethos of con-
stant connectivity and expected availability. Younger genera-
tions (including undergraduate-aged individuals that we focus
on in our study) are particularly heavy and habituated users;
of 18-29 year olds, 83% own a smartphone, 90% sleep with
their phones on or next to their bed, and 93% hold at least one
account on social media platforms such as Facebook [38].

While technology may therefore be a source of circadian dis-
ruption, it simultaneously offers an opportunity for sleep-
related sensing and intervention given that it mediates behav-
ior and as such offers a window into daily rhythms and the so-
cial factors impacting them. Pertinently, HCI researchers are

increasingly studying sleep-related behaviors, and commer-
cial sleep-tracking technology is appearing. However, neither
consider circadian patterns nor address and accommodate in-
dividual circadian differences. Similarly, technological solu-
tions often focus on treating the symptoms of a misaligned
biological clock rather than having awareness to work in tune
with a user’s underlying circadian rhythms in the ﬁrst place.

Such grounding in chronobiology separates our research from
related work on sleep, behavior, and technology. In this pa-
per, we demonstrate analyses that consider individual circa-
dian variations, and we offer design visions for circadian-
aware monitoring and intervention systems. Undertaking a
97 day study, we explore links between technology usage and
circadian rhythms using quantitative and qualitative meth-
ods. Speciﬁcally, we uncover ways in which technology and
sleep are related, with a focus on how sleep patterns, quality,
and misalignment are reﬂected through features of technol-
ogy use. Beyond analyzing sleep, we investigate its relation-
ship with waking behaviors and daily functioning, offering
methods for assessing attention, cognition, and mood.

RELATED WORK

Chronobiology and Sleep
Chronobiology is the ﬁeld of study concerned with the
rhythms that guide biological functioning. The biological cy-
cles of all living organisms, humans included, are coordinated
by endogenous body clocks that maintain a circadian period
[45]. Individual differences exist in these functions (such as
the timing of sleep-promoting hormone secretions [43]), are
reﬂected by a person’s chronotype, and result in individual
variations in the preferred timing and duration of sleep [25].

A common distinction is made between early and late chrono-
types – people who prefer to wake earlier or sleep later.
Chronotype is a phenotype, meaning that it results from a
person’s genetics interacting with features of her environ-
ment such as light exposure [45]. Chronotype also depends
on gender and age [43]. Men tend to be later chronotypes
than women during most of adulthood until coinciding after
menopause around age 50. Children and people over 60 are
typically earlier chronotypes, adolescents are later types, and
maximum lateness occurs around age 20, which is the same
or very close to the ages of the participants in our study.

Finally, social demands such as those from work or re-
lationships further impact sleep patterns [39]. Sleep and
wake behaviors are thus inﬂuenced by three complex and
individually-variable factors: an internal circadian oscillator
that promotes wakefulness during the day and manages ex-
ternal cues to remain synchronized (“entrained”) with the en-
vironment, a homeostatic system that promotes the need to
sleep the longer we remain awake, and a social clock based
on social responsibilities and commitments [45].

Social Computing for Health Assessment
As just mentioned, circadian disruptions often stem from fac-
tors that are social in nature. Our study therefore examines
the efﬁcacy of leveraging socially-sensed data for sleep mea-
surement. Social sensing for the assessment of health-related

844

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

behaviors is desirable for a number of reasons, including
that collection is less obtrusive and can be done on a larger
scale than standard survey or body-sensor based approaches.
Speaking to the reach of social media, 90% of 18-29 year
olds regularly use social media, 82% of 30-49 year olds, 65%
of 50-64, and 49% of 65+ with ﬁgures for all age groups
steadily rising [14]. A growing body of research has indeed
had success in leveraging social media and communication
data to model various health-related traits and behaviors, par-
ticularly relevant examples of which include emotional well-
being, sleep, and physical health (e.g., [30, 32, 34]).

Sleep Sensing
A growing number of HCI and ubiquitous computing re-
searchers are bringing their attention to the study of sleep-
related behaviors and disorders as well as to the develop-
ment of systems for measurement and intervention. On the
measurement side, iSleep [15] and wakeNsmile [26] utilize
smartphone microphones to detect sleep-related motion and
sounds and predict sleep events. SleepMiner [2], BES [11],
Toss’n’Turn [31] have similarly used ambient sound and light
together with phone usage data such as screen unlock events,
battery status, app use, and communication logs to predict
sleep state, quality, and duration. On the assessment and
intervention side, Lullaby [23] records temperature, sound,
light, motion, and pictures in order to help users identify envi-
ronmental factors responsible for interrupted sleep. ShutEye
[3] also aims to give users insight into how activities such as
caffeine intake and exercise may subsequently impact sleep,
in this case via a glanceable wallpaper display.

Such efforts towards sensing and intervention are encourag-
ing steps toward supporting users in monitoring and improv-
ing their sleep-related behaviors as well as increasing our sci-
entiﬁc knowledge surrounding sleep. However, they still have
shortcomings. First, they tend to be intrusive or burdensome
to use as they require users to wear equipment or manually
log sleep and wake events, plus sensing is not yet sophis-
ticated enough to handle complex sleep environments (e.g.,
with partners or pets). Systems also tend to present generic
recommendations rather than provide personalized support
that accounts for individual variability, both contextually and
biologically speaking; for instance, consider the blanket rec-
ommendation “End caffeine consumption 8-14 hours before
bedtime” [3], even though caffeine does not affect everyone
equally [51]. As another example, variants in the per3 clock
gene can signiﬁcantly inﬂuence aspects of a person’s daily
functioning such as the response to sleep deprivation [48].

This relates to the crux of our motivation – these systems do
not take circadian rhythms into consideration nor incorporate
key endogenous and exogenous factors such as chronotype,
daytime light exposure, and social constraints into the assess-
ment of sleep. The aforesaid research on technology use and
health (including sleep) similarly lacks the chronobiological
underpinnings necessary to more holistically interpret obser-
vations in a way that bears in mind latent biological aspects.
Guided by a theoretical understanding of the biology behind
sleep and wake behaviors, we aim ﬁrstly to better understand
the interplay between external factors and internal rhythms

SESSION: SOCIAL LIFE

and to secondly develop novel sensing techniques that lever-
age awareness of circadian variables to more accurately as-
sess neurobehavioral functions and misalignments.

Preliminary work towards applying a circadian perspective
to sleep sensing [1] is promising in its ability to infer
sleep timing, duration, and disruption using computationally
lightweight techniques based on mobile screen on/off events.
However, it does not dig into how or why such technology
use interacts with sleep, and it does not study a broader set of
circadian processes beyond sleep. Going deeper, we explore
potential links between technology use and sleep as well as
how sleep disruption may relate to a wider range of neurobe-
havioral variables that display circadian rhythmicity – specif-
ically attention, cognition, and mood. We also incorporate
a fuller set of usage data from both mobile and web tech-
nologies as well as linguistic features of content generated via
those systems. Given the inﬂuence the aforementioned “so-
cial clock” can have on modulating (including misaligning)
our internal circadian rhythms, this study focuses on socially-
sensed data: social media and communication data.

We note the relationships we observe are complex and multi-
faceted. For example, poor sleep may manifest in technology
use, technology use may result in poor sleep, and/or both may
reﬂect some third factor. The same applies for the neurobe-
havioral variables we study (e.g. negative mood may both re-
ﬂect and cause poor sleep, and both negative mood and poor
sleep may be indicative of other factors such as depression
and stress). While it is beyond the scope of this paper to fully
disentangle such intricacies, we are able to demonstrate how
technology use can be used to infer sleep onset, duration, and
disruption; how disruption may manifest through subsequent
usage patterns; and how the impact of disruption on attention,
cognition and mood can be quantiﬁed using these patterns.

METHOD
Our social sensing methodology is apt for young adults and
undergraduate students, a compelling population to spotlight
since they tend to be on the later end of the chronotype scale
and therefore experience the most severe symptoms and con-
sequences of social jet lag (the sleep-schedule instability that
stems from social schedules interfering with biological sleep
preferences) [43]. Studies also ﬁnd undergraduates suffer
from chronic lost and interrupted sleep, which can lead to
poorer academic performance, increased stress, mental health
problems, and increased drug and alcohol consumption [46].

To explore college students’ sleep-related behaviors along
with how their technology-mediated social interactions not
only impact these behaviors but may also enable the com-
putational assessment of circadian patterns and disorders, we
captured a combination of qualitative and quantitative data
through survey instruments, sleep diaries, phone and social
media logs, and periodic in-person interviews. All data were
anonymized, encrypted, and stored locally on a drive to which
only the authors had access. Participants were compensated
based on the number of completed sleep diary entries and the
amount of phone-sensed data successfully logged. The Cor-
nell Institutional Review Board approved all procedures.

845

Gender Study Diary

Participant
ID
P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9

Age
Range
20-21
20-21
18-19
18-19
18-19
18-19
22-24
18-19
20-21

M
M
M
M
M
F
M
F
M

CMC
Days Entries Data
1771
93
2904
94
1511
28
1117
66
2739
78
2243
66
1420
80
752
46
3187
74

97
96
95
93
93
91
87
92
76

Table 1. Study demographics

Participants
We recruited undergraduates using public mailing lists and
snowball sampling to obtain a sample of 9 participants (7
males, 2 females) aged 19-25 years old. All had been us-
ing smartphones for at least 6 months prior to beginning our
study. Participant characteristics are summarized in Table 1.

Given that we are interested in how social interactions and
socially-deﬁned demands impact circadian patterns, our study
spans three key phases in undergraduate life: end of Fall
semester (34 days), Winter break (24 days), and start of
Spring semester (39 days). All participants had standard class
schedules during the Fall and Spring semesters, except for
one who had an internship during the Fall and attended no
classes then. Our extended period of study allowed us to cap-
ture across participants more than 600 data points of sleep
information and over 17,000 socially-sensed usage events –
measures we describe further in the subsections that follow.

Survey Measures

Chronotype
As described earlier, a person’s chronotype indicates his or
her unique circadian rhythms across a range of physiological,
cognitive, and behavioral traits and functions. To measure
individual chronotype, we administered the Munich Chrono-
Type Questionnaire (MCTQ) [45]. The MCTQ asks about
sleep and wake timings on work and free days as well as
about work and lifestyle details in order to classify respon-
dents from extreme early to extreme late types. It has been
clinically validated in controlled settings against sleep-logs,
actigraphy-data, and blood parameters [44]. To provide a
comparable representation of chronotype, the MCTQ uses
sleep midpoint on free days (M SFsc) [50], a corrected mea-
sure of the halfway point between sleep time and wake time:

M SFsc = M SF − 0.5 (SDF − (5 ∗ SDW + 2 ∗ SDF )/7)

where SDF and SDW are sleep duration on free days and
work days, respectively, and (5 ∗ SDW + 2 ∗ SDF )/7 pro-
vides the average sleep duration across a week. The correc-
tion of M SF is necessary to account for oversleep on free
days. That is, most people (except for extreme early chrono-
types) accumulate sleep debt during work days and then com-
pensate (if possible) by oversleeping on free days [45].

Figure 1 shows chronotype according to M SFSC for each
participant; the ﬁgure’s early-late key is based on a MCTQ-
deﬁned spectrum. We can see that our sample provides access

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

logs of status updates, posted comments and Likes, location
checkins, asked Questions, and outgoing private messages.
We refer to all these Facebook data as “posts”. Since we are
interested in participants’ Facebook interactions with other
users, we ﬁlter out system-generated posts (e.g. tagged photo
alerts). We focus on Facebook since it is the most popular
social network used by all of our participants but note that it
would be desirable in future work to incorporate data from ad-
ditional social media platforms to further verify and compare
results. Table 1 provides the number of days for which valid
phone data was captured as well as the total number of col-
lected technology-mediated interactions (altogether referred
to as “CMC” for Computer-Mediated Communication).

Interviews
We conducted periodic interviews with participants through-
out the study – one upon initial recruitment, a second inter-
view at the end of the Fall semester prior to the start of Win-
ter break, and a third concluding interview at the end of the
study. These interviews provide the opportunity to verify as-
sumptions and seek explanations about participants’ observed
behaviors as well as to validate our circadian analyses and in-
ferences against a self-report ground truth. To contextualize
quantitative results with relevant qualitative details, we in-
clude insights from these interviews throughout the paper.

FINDINGS

Daily Technological and Biological Rhythms
To begin, we analyze phone probes, social media logs, and
sleep diaries to gain a sense of typical trends in participants’
technology use and sleep-wake behaviors as well as poten-
tial links between them. To support the assumption that our
small scale participant pool is representative of college stu-
dents more generally, we also compare these observations to
those from prior studies, consistently ﬁnding close alignment.

First, we observe the daily usage trends shown in Figure 2.
We see usage is heaviest in late evening, until about 11pm.
Levels of social media app usage and Facebook posting activ-
ity in particular continue slightly later until around 1am. Our
observations align well with prior studies on CMC use, which
ﬁnd that Facebook usage increases through the evening until
around midnight [30], that social mobile applications have the
highest probability of being used from 9pm to 1am [6], and
that text messaging frequently occurs late at night and causes
later bedtimes [47]. Following this CMC use, sleep journal
entries indicate participants go to sleep within an average of
49 minutes; prior research similarly ﬁnds sleep occurs within
60 minutes of computer use for 60% of 19-29 year olds [35].

Figure 2. Daily trends in participants’ average CMC-based usage

846

Figure 1. Participant chronotypes (corrected mid-sleep on free days)

to a range of chronotypes, allowing comparison of the effects
of social jet lag for different types. Though our sample size
works for exploratory study and as described below enabled
us to conduct multiple interviews in order to augment our
analyses with rich qualitative data, we also administered the
MCTQ to over 200 additional students for comparison. Most
of our participants tend toward the later end of the spectrum
as expected given their ages, though P4 actually has quite an
early chronotype for that age (sample mean M SFSC=05:53
not including P4; sample mean M SFSC=05:34 including
P4). Generating an age and sex matched random sample from
the N=281 large survey returns a mean M SFSC=05:46 and
helps assure that our sample is representative of late-type col-
lege students who regularly use social media.

Personality
Psychological differences can affect circadian timings and
sleep-related behaviors. In particular, studies have found Big
Five personality dimensions [12] may be signiﬁcant predic-
tors of early vs. late timing. As a personality assessment, we
administered the Big Five Inventory (BFI) [20]. All personal-
ity factors show good internal consistency within participants
(Cronbach Alpha between 0.74 - 0.89). We also ﬁnd expected
correlations between our participants’ chronotype and per-
sonality – in particular, earlier types show signiﬁcantly higher
levels of Conscientiousness (r = 0.71, p < 0.05).

Sleep Diary
Throughout the study, each participant maintained a daily on-
line sleep journal to record bedtime, number of minutes to
fall asleep, and wake time as well as any sleep disturbances
and perceived feelings upon waking. Participants received a
reminder email each morning to complete the journal entry
for the prior night’s sleep. To ensure data quality, we discard
any retrospective entries and retain only those that record the
previous day’s sleep. Prior studies validate the reliability of
such self-report for per-night sleep [37].

Phone Probes and Social Media Logs
Participants also installed a smartphone application we devel-
oped to run in the background and collect usage data. In this
study, we focus on the probes for technology-mediated so-
cial interactions: phone calls, text messages, and social me-
dia app usage. In addition, we requested participants’ permis-
sion to download their Facebook friend data along with their

Extreme EarlyModerate EarlyAverageModerate LateExtreme LateP1P2P3P4P5P6P7P8P99 am876543 amP1 (6:59)P2 (6:41)P5   (6:38)P3 (6:12)P9 (5:43)P6 (5:18)P7 (4:54)P8 (4:41)P4 (3:02)89101112123456789101112345OverallPhone CallsText MessagesSocial Media AppsFacebook Posts147ampm12am12108462Mean # per daySESSION: SOCIAL LIFE

Individuals in this 19-29 age group are known to go to sleep
later than any other age group, and adolescents in particu-
lar tend to delay their bed and wake times as well as suf-
fer from decreased sleep length and increased sleep irregu-
larity [13, 30]. Indeed, our participants’ average sleep onset
ranges from 1:36-2:14am (depending on weekday or week-
end, semester or vacation) – quite late timings, likely since
they are on the younger side of this age range. Additionally,
we ﬁnd less than half (49.1%) of reported sleep durations to
be 7 or 8 hours, and 23.3% of reported durations are 6 hours
or less. Our ﬁndings are close to those observed in prior stud-
ies [32] and indicate a concerningly high incidence of insuf-
ﬁcient sleep among our participants. We also ﬁnd 15.2% of
sleep durations to be 10 hours or more, which is further trou-
bling given that exceedingly long as well as short sleep du-
rations are detrimental to mental and physical health and are
associated with a range of problems related to academic per-
formance, reckless behavior, and substance abuse [17].

Researchers have suggested that such sleep inadequacy may
in part be due to increased usage of the internet and social
media [24]. Our own study ﬁnds similar results – that social
media may not only reﬂect but also modulate delayed sleep
onsets. Speciﬁcally, on nights when participants use social
media apps and post to Facebook after 12am, they report an
average of 34 minutes less sleep. From participants’ sleep
logs about how many times they wake up during the night,
we can also compare each night’s number of sleep interrup-
tions to the timing and amount of social media use the prior
day. We ﬁnd that for nights during which participants ex-
perienced one or more sleep interruptions, they used social
media nearly twice as much the day before (1.8 times more
on average; Wilcoxon sign-rank test, p < .001). Journal en-
tries suggest such behavior produces feelings of tiredness,
as analysis shows late night social media use is associated
with reports of feeling “fatigued” as opposed to “refreshed”
(χ2 = 10.21, df = 1, p < .05). Facebook updates from the
following day sometimes express similar exhaustion – as ex-
amples, “Super sleepy”, “I woke up at eight. I am exhausted”,
and “So tired and really want another hour to sleep”.

Interviews reveal ways CMC is part of bedtime habits. For
example, “I do my before-sleep routine, get into bed with
my phone, spend about 15 minutes on Facebook, then set my
alarm, put the phone under my pillow, and am asleep”. All
participants in relationships report using CMC to communi-
cate with partners just before bed. Late types note using so-
cial media as something to do when unable to fall asleep (due
to their late biological clock), while as expected our early type
disagrees, “people usually keep me up not technology”, re-
ferring to evening social schedules, which are shaped more
by late types [43]. Participants also express that social media
keeps them up longer than planned, for common reasons such
as “endless scrolling” social feeds that make them “feel like
an addict, obligated” to “need to know what’s going on”.

Based on these ﬁndings that social media use relates to sleep
characteristics such as length and quality, we next explore
leveraging usage data for unobtrusive sleep sensing, includ-
ing of misalignments related to social jet lag.

Leveraging Social Data for Sleep Sensing
We ﬁrst attempt to infer sleep events from CMC patterns by
implementing the sleep-inference algorithm built on screen
on/off patterns presented in [1]. We instantiate our algorithm
using phone probe data, social media app use logs, and Face-
book posts to model sleep events according to the longest
nightly gaps in usage. We pre-process these social-sensor in-
puts to ﬁlter usage events before 10pm or after 7am, which
do not normally coincide with sleep periods since our partic-
ipants are not shift workers [21]. Following a recommended
threshold, we also eliminate any usage events with a duration
of less than 30 seconds, which are likely due to automated
phone notiﬁcations rather than active user interactions [1].

Table 2 presents the accuracy of our sleep duration inference
compared with the screen on/off approach and with partic-
ipants’ ground truth sleep journals. Results show our tech-
nique’s reliability, which achieves an average difference of
only 23 minutes between socially-sensed and self-reported
sleep duration. This prediction is more accurate than from
screen on/off alone [1]; and we also manage to outperform
more complex algorithms based on environmental factors
such as light, movement, and sound as well as phone lock-
ing and charging events [11]. Our approach is thus desirable
for a few key reasons. First, our technique is as reliable yet
more unobtrusive and computationally lightweight than those
built upon frequent momentary assessments (EMAs), heavy
instrumentation, or the use of wearable sensors. In addition,
by leveraging web data, we are able (unlike approaches based
solely on mobile sensor data) to continue capturing signals
about a user’s behavior even if she is interacting through a
device other than her personal phone such as a tablet, desktop
PC, friend’s device, or public computer.

Our approach overestimates sleep when the stop and start of
CMC use do not precisely adjoin sleep onset and wake, re-
spectively. By incorporating an error term to the calculation
of sleep duration per participant (based on chronotype and in-
dividual differences in pre-bed and post-wakeup CMC usage
learned from the study’s ﬁrst week of data), we are some-
what able to correct for this non-usage gap, and more com-
plex learning can further improve accuracy. Conversely, we
sometimes underestimate sleep duration when notiﬁcations
are mistaken as active usage. By incorporating a threshold for
minimum usage duration, we attempt to ﬁlter out such device-

Screen Ground Truth

Social
Data On-Off
8.54*
8.44*
8.09
7.64*
8.33*
8.21*
8.02*
7.53*
5.44*
6.11*
7.17*
7.15*
7.16*
7.63
7.30*
7.38*
5.42
7.48

P1
P2
P3
P4
P5
P6
P7
P8
P9

Diary
8.13
7.45
8.15
7.25
6.12
7.13
7.14
8.14
6.25

Table 2. Average sleep duration for each participant according to social-
sensor and self-reported ground-truth data. (* denotes inferences that
fall within 95% conﬁdence interval based on diary self-reports, p < .01)

847

generated events, but more sophisticated instrumentation can
further help eliminate such misinterpretation of phone events
not indicative of genuine user activity.

Our interview data allow us to uncover other points of fail-
ure and opportunities for improvement. For instance, P9 de-
scribed pre-bed phone use as a common tendency, identifying
watching movies and using Twitter as typical nightly activi-
ties, and she also noted normally checking email and texts
upon waking. Similarly, P7 told us that morning phone use
involved weather and calendar checking, and he discussed us-
ing Facebook and playing video games before bed but ex-
plained that he does so on a desktop computer rather than the
phone. Thus incorporating into our sensing both additional
forms of social data (e.g., Twitter, email) as well as broader
non-CMC usage data (e.g., app logs, web histories) and from
across multiple devices would be straightforward next steps
towards more precise sleep-event estimations.

Assessing Circadian Disruption
As previously discussed, social constraints can result in later
sleep onsets and earlier required wake times that are in oppo-
sition to our own internal timings. Alarmingly, it is estimated
that over 80% of the population suffers from social jet lag
[41], and we unfortunately observe it impacting each of our
participants as well. Figure 3 shows the average social-sensed
sleep duration on work days and free days for each participant
and illustrates the discrepancy between the two. (Note that
for our participants work days are Monday through Friday
and free days correspond to Saturday and Sunday, but gen-
erally speaking, work and free days do not necessarily have
to coincide with the standard workweek and weekend days).
Duration is calculated as the amount of time between sleep
onset and wake [36]. Our results compare well to those from
prior analyses of the MCTQ database, which similarly ﬁnd
social jet lag ranging from approximately 1-2 hours [42].

First, these results demonstrate how our later chronotypes’
sleep duration is systematically shortened on work days,
which leads to accumulated sleep debt that is then compen-
sated for by sleeping more on the weekend. This same ef-

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

fect has been observed in extant research [45]. Excluding our
early chronotype (P4), participants sleep an average of 67.8
minutes more on weekends. In contrast, P4 exhibits precisely
the opposite pattern. For this individual, longer durations of
sleep happen on weekdays while sleep is shortened on the
weekend. This is likely because P4’s work week schedule ﬁts
better with his internal timing preferences while his weekend
sleep is forced to shift due to social engagements with later-
type peers.
Indeed, sleep onset for P4 is 93 minutes later
on weekends than during the week, plus sleep duration is re-
duced (by an average of 54 minutes) since the natural circa-
dian drive prompts an early wake up even after a later-than-
preferred sleep onset following a night of socializing [43].
Altogether, these ﬁndings about the reversed sleep patterns of
early and late chronotypes on work and free days thus show
how our sensing is able to reveal a well-known chronobiolog-
ical phenomenon called the “scissors of sleep” [39].

To next quantify social jet lag and assess its severity across
our participants, we compute the difference between mid-
sleep (the halfway point between sleep onset and waking) on
free days (MSF) and on work days (MSW) per [50]:

∆M S = |M SF − M SW |

Figure 4 shows the results of this calculation according to the
social-sensed data, presented according to participant chrono-
type. Our ﬁndings are similar to those from prior work [1].
Speciﬁcally, we see increased social jet lag on the extreme
ends of the chronotype spectrum, and as expected it is most
severe for our later types since their socially-constrained days
(work days) outnumber their free days (weekends) [50].

We also compare social jet lag across our study phases (Fall
semester, Winter break, and Spring semester) since academic
responsibilities, employment schedules, and social expecta-
tions vary across these periods. Figure 5 illustrates results.
During the Fall and Spring semesters, sleep midpoint is much
earlier on weekdays vs. weekends since imposed class sched-
ules force earlier wake up times during the week. Further,
we see that more sleep debt accumulates during work days
in the Fall compared to the Spring semester, as reﬂected by
a considerable shift in weekend sleep midpoint during Fall
weekends in order to compensate. We believe this is due to
the fact that our Fall study phase overlapped with the highly
demanding end-of-semester exam period whereas our Spring
study phase was during the (slightly) less intensive start of the

Figure 3. Average sleep duration on work days and free days reveal the
“scissors of sleep”

Figure 4. Socially-sensed average social jet lag (discrepancy between
mid-sleep on free days and work days) across chronotypes

848

98765Sleep Duration (hours)Work daysWeekends43210P1P2P3P4P5P6P7P8P9Chronotype (MSF)Social Jet Lag (minutes)80706050403020103:00-4:00am4:00-5:005:00-6:006:00-7:00SESSION: SOCIAL LIFE

Figure 5. Shifts in sleep midpoint across study phases

semester. A number of Facebook posts from our dataset sug-
gest this to be the case as well, for example: “lab exam. how
much should i stay up to study tonight??” (Fall) compared to
“still just shopping for classes” (Spring).

On the other hand, when these external academic pressures
somewhat subside during the Winter break and participants
can more freely choose their sleep timings, we ﬁnd far less
ﬂuctuation between sleep midpoint on weekdays vs. week-
ends, which differ by less than 10 minutes. Still, individual
differences can exist in terms of social dynamics during va-
cation periods. From interviews, we learned that some partic-
ipants’ main social groups were located in the place to where
they were travelling, resulting in a substantially reduced need
to use CMC technology to maintain contact as compared to
while away at school. On the other hand, other participants
told us that their online networks were mainly comprised of
schoolmates, which meant leaving during the break instead
resulted in increased CMC usage to maintain contact. The
same set of assumptions regarding technology usage patterns
thus should not be generically applied without considering
idiosyncrasies and individual circumstances.

Sleep Disruption and Inertia
A number of potential factors can contribute to sleep disrup-
tion. To name a few, caffeine, napping, exercise, and alcohol
are commonly studied by ubiquitous computing researchers,
sometimes with an eye to developing tracking technology de-
signed to help users maintain sleep hygiene (e.g., [3, 28]).
Regardless of its culprit, the detrimental cognitive, psycho-
logical, and physical effects of poor sleep are numerous [9,
36]; and such deﬁciencies that follow a night of inadequate
sleep can be initially observed during the wake up process.
Speciﬁcally, the term sleep inertia is used to describe the
time a person takes to become fully awake and functional,
and prolonged sleep inertia is a symptom of social jet lag
[45]. Given that the duration of morning technology usage
has been shown to be a reasonable proxy of sleep inertia [1],
we investigate what speciﬁc technology-mediated activities
typically comprise morning usage, along with the feasibility
of using social sensing to model this sleep-wake transition.

Analyzing rise time usage, we ﬁnd that all participants report
using their smartphones within 5 or 10 minutes after wak-
ing up for activities such as browsing the internet, checking
email, and interacting with social media or communication
apps. Note that this usage is separate from alarm-related us-
age (7 of 9 participants report using their smartphones as their

849

daily alarms). This duration of morning phone use is consis-
tent with prior large-scale studies on college students’ mo-
bile device habits [27], which also ﬁnd that communication
applications are nearly always the ﬁrst apps used upon wak-
ing from sleep [6]. Our phone probe and social media data
conﬁrm these tendencies as well – on average, some form of
technology-mediated social interaction is detected within an
hour of waking, with text messaging being the predominant
form of social technology use (compared with phone calls and
social media) on more than two thirds of mornings.

We attempt to operationalize sleep inertia according to the
duration of morning CMC activity but do not see the same
strong association found in prior work that bases usage on
screen on/off events [1]. This suggests CMC-based activities
are a viable option for assessing wake events since they are
frequently a user’s ﬁrst form of usage upon waking but that
attention soon turns to other phone-based interactions that are
more apt for measuring sleep inertia speciﬁcally. Our inter-
views reveal such interactions often involve browsing news,
weather, and videos – usage events that can be taken into con-
sideration when building models to predict morning inertia
and transitional states out of sleep.

Monitoring Neurobehavioral Functioning
As mentioned previously, social jet lag has numerous detri-
mental consequences, with symptoms manifesting as cog-
nitive difﬁculties and emotional problems. Moving beyond
morning circadian rhythms, we therefore next explore the im-
pacts of sleep on such neurobehavioral functioning through-
out the following day, speciﬁcally focusing on attention, cog-
nitive performance, and mood. These characteristics are
known to exhibit strong circadian patterns, suffer substan-
tially after sleep loss and interruption, and are considered es-
pecially important attributes to evaluate for individuals in our
participants’ age group [36].

We explore utilizing a number of socially-sensed variables
in order to operationalize activity levels, social interactions,
cognition, and emotions, all of which prior research and our
own experimentation suggest as highly relevant to perform-
ing such circadian assessments. Here we present our analyses
that reveal meaningful differences in these variables on days
following nights of varying sleep quality. Comparisons are
performed on medians using Wilcoxon sign-rank tests. Fol-
lowing established guidelines, we treat sleep durations last-
ing 7 - 9 hours as “adequate” and durations outside this range
as “inadequate” [10] – though just as our internal biological
clocks direct our preferred sleep timings, there are individual
differences in sleep need as well [45].

Attention and Cyberloaﬁng. Cyberloaﬁng is a term used
to refer to idling and procrastination behaviors [29]. Such
tendencies to postpone tasks may be explained by a lack of
attention and an inability to focus that stem from insufﬁcient
self-regulatory resources, which drain over the course of a
day and require adequate sleep to become restored [4]. Both
sleep quantity and quality are important to this restoration
[18], and an individual’s failure to obtain both can result in
increased levels of cyberloaﬁng [33].

Work daysWeekendsFallWinterSpringSleep Midpoint 6:306:005:305:004:304:00amVolume **
Burstiness ***
Frequency ***

Adequate
18
6.12
0.71

Inadequate
34
9.54
0.43

Table 3. Median values of CMC-based activity levels following nights
of Adequate vs. Inadequate sleep. Signiﬁcant differences in medians
marked on variable name (**p < .001, ***p < .0001)

To capture cyberloaﬁng behaviors, we therefore compute the
following interactivity-based measures:

• Volume: The total number of technology-mediated social
interactions a participant performs in a given day between
initially waking and eventually going to sleep.

• Burstiness: The maximum number of interactions of a par-

ticipant in any single hour between wake and sleep.

• Frequency: The number of hours between a participant’s

successive interactions.

As presented in Table 3, our analysis of these variables ﬁnds
that individuals who report inadequate levels of sleep are far
heavier users of technology the following day. Speciﬁcally,
nights of insufﬁcient sleep are associated with more CMC-
based interactions the following day, which are made more
frequently and in tighter temporal bursts. Correlating hours of
sleep with the amount of next-day cyberloaﬁng activity shows
the same negative relationship (r = −.52, p < .01). During
interviews, participants all mentioned checking social media
when having trouble focusing or concentrating, which they
expressed often happens when tired – e.g., “If I’m more tired,
I’m less able to pay attention in class and more likely to use
phone to avoid falling asleep or get bored more easily”.

Prior research shows individuals with higher levels of con-
scientiousness may naturally possess more self-regulatory re-
sources [12] and be less susceptible to cyberloaﬁng follow-
ing lost or disrupted sleep. We therefore perform linear re-
gression between sleep duration and the amount of subse-
quent CMC activity while controlling for personality. We ﬁnd
sleep duration (β = −.39, p < .001) and conscientiousness
(β = −.16, p < .01) to be signiﬁcant predictors of subse-
quent CMC usage, and the negative direction of the partial
slopes again indicates that the less sleep an individual gets,
the more she uses CMC technologies the following day.

Cognitive Performance.
Impairment on academic perfor-
mance results from sleep deprivation. Sleep loss makes cir-
cadian variation in performance most evident, and the impair-
ment effects of fatigue coupled with endogenous changes in
daily brain function have even been equated to alcohol intox-
ication. Conversely, adequate sleep duration improves learn-
ing and problem solving [49].

As a proxy for daily cognitive performance, we utilize par-
ticipants’ Facebook posts. We ﬁrst perform standard pre-
processing on the text-based content of posts (e.g., removing
punctuation and URLs, handling spelling errors, and so on)
and then calculate the following cognitive-based measures,
which represent the sophistication of a participant’s posts and
the cognitive complexity the writing required:

• LIX: A readability measure that indicates the difﬁculty of
reading a piece of text, computed as the percentage of

850

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

LIX *
TReDIX **

Adequate
0.3592
0.2738
Table 4. Median values of cognitive performance following nights of Ad-
equate vs. Inadequate sleep. Signiﬁcant differences in medians marked
on variable name (*p < .05, **p < .01)

Inadequate
0.3003
0.2144

words having 7 or more letters plus the average number
of words per post [5].

• TReDIX: A LIX-based measure adapted for use with social
media content, computed as a ratio of the total count of
words having 7 or more letters that appear in all posts made
within a time period over the total number of posts made
in that time period [19].

As summarized in Table 4, we ﬁnd that an adequate num-
ber of hours of sleep relate to higher levels of complex
thought according to both cognitive performance measures.
The greatest difference is seen in the TReDIX measure, and
linear regression conﬁrms a positive relationship – that is,
the fewer hours of sleep, the lower the subsequently demon-
strated cognitive ability according to social-sensor based as-
sessment (β = 2.17, r2 = 0.12, p < .001).

Mood. Consequences of sleep reduction include tension,
nervousness, negative emotions, and irritability [36]. Con-
versely, extending sleep improves alertness, reaction time,
and mood [22]. To evaluate whether socially-sensed data
can be used to reﬂect circadian patterns in mood, we again
turn to Facebook post data and this time apply psycholinguis-
tic analysis techniques to compute the following sentiment-
based measure:

• Sentiment Intensity Rate: A measure of how intensely pos-
itive or negative emotions are, computed as the ratio of the
sum of valence intensity of positive or negative language
in posts to the total number of posts in a period [19].

To avoid skewed results due to participants with many more
Facebook posts than others, we normalize values of our senti-
ment variables to be between 0 and 1 (where values closer to
1 indicate levels of the sentiment variable are nearer to the
maximum value ever observed for that individual and val-
ues closer to 0 indicate levels nearer the minimum). Table
5 shows the differences in positive and negative emotions ex-
pressed after adequate and inadequate sleep.

We ﬁnd that positive affect following nights with adequate
sleep is 1.75 times higher than following nights with inad-
equate sleep, after which negative sentiment is instead over
twice as high. Figure 6 illustrates the difference in negative
sentiment on days following nights of varying sleep duration.
A similar relationship between insufﬁcient sleep and negative
affect has been observed in prior studies that required partici-
pants to take daily EMA-based mood assessments [32]. In in-
terviews, participants consistently noted their usage is higher

Positive Sentiment Intensity ***
Negative Sentiment Intensity ***

Adequate
0.5373
0.4176

Inadequate
0.3057
0.8388

Table 5. Median values of sentiment expressed in Facebook posts fol-
lowing nights of Adequate vs. Inadequate sleep. Signiﬁcant differences
in medians marked on variable name (***p < .0001)

SESSION: SOCIAL LIFE

Figure 6. Sleep duration and sentiment the following day

when energy and mood are lower (e.g., feeling “more down”
or “down and frustrated”) and also described using social me-
dia to “vent” or seek social support when tired and irritated.

It appears the timing of sleep onset also relates to the sub-
sequent day’s mood, as we additionally ﬁnd that participants
whose ﬁnal CMC activity happens after 3am have the lowest
levels of measured sentiment the following day, while posts
from individuals who go to sleep at an earlier time are 2.2
times more positive the following day. More obtrusive stud-
ies administering end-of-day mood surveys and employing
a wide array of sensors (e.g., computer logging, heart-rate
monitors) have similarly found that people who go to bed the
earliest are also the happiest [30], and our observation also
aligns with prior work associating late night social media us-
age with depression and stress, though the cause vs. effect
remains unknown [34]. Our results thus complement prior
ﬁndings about a connection between sleep and affect as well
as demonstrate how social media can reveal this relationship.

DISCUSSION
Our overall motivation in undertaking this research was to ex-
plore how technology-mediated social interactions and com-
munication patterns can be leveraged to provide an unobtru-
sive and scalable technique for the robust monitoring and as-
sessment of circadian rhythms. In particular, we focused in
this study on examining sleep along with its relationship to
attention, cognition, and emotion. Our ﬁndings suggest that
socially-sensed data can serve as a proxy to measure circadian
sleep timing and related neurobehavioral variability as well as
the extent of circadian misalignment and social jet lag.

Technology Modulates and Reﬂects Circadian Patterns
We ﬁrst explored temporal trends in technology-use and sleep
and the potential impact of the former on the latter. Our
ﬁndings align with prior research while providing more ﬁne-
grained views into how technology use may be related to
lost and interrupted sleep. Speciﬁcally, we saw that use of
computer-mediated communication technologies is heaviest
at night and that the later the technology use, the fewer subse-
quent hours of sleep obtained. We also found increased levels
of social media use to be associated with signiﬁcantly more
sleep disruptions and increased reports of tiredness the fol-
lowing day. We further observed a chronic pattern of under-
sleep across all our participants, and our interviews corrobo-
rated that social media plays into lost and interrupted sleep.

Having found usage of social technology to be coupled with
sleep behaviors, we next harnessed this social-sensor data as

851

a means of assessing sleep events and quality. Our algorithm
was able to infer sleep events to within 23 minutes on average,
a level of accuracy comparable to more complicated and in-
trusive techniques. The fact that our approach enables reliable
and real-time sleep assessment could thus directly beneﬁt the
research of chronobiologists who express a pressing need to
capture in-situ data from large populations spread across di-
verse locations and time zones [40].

The ability of our approach to passively detect sleep events
next allowed us to assess circadian disruption. In doing so,
we found evidence of substantial sleep debt and social jet lag
across all participants as well as considerable ﬂuctuations in
sleep during periods when school was in or out of session.
We next examined the impacts of such insufﬁcient sleep on
prominent neurobehavioral processes – attention, cognition,
and mood. It is beyond the scope of this paper to fully un-
ravel the chicken-and-egg uncertainty regarding underlying
factors behind technology use and other possible explanations
for circadian disruption and its neurobehavioral consequences
(there is fertile ground for future research to shed light on the
impact of attention, cognition, and mood on sleep, as well
as the potential role of third factors on all four). Still, our
ﬁndings do indicate that lack of quality sleep manifests it-
self in cyberloaﬁng behaviors according to increased amount,
frequency, and burstiness of technology usage the following
day. Then looking to the effects of sleep on cognitive per-
formance according to the expression of complex thought in
text-based social media content, we found an adequate num-
ber of hours of sleep was related to increased performance
while fewer hours of sleep was associated with lower demon-
stration of cognitive ability. Lastly, we performed sentiment
analysis on this same text-based content in order to evalu-
ate sleep’s relationship to mood and found signiﬁcantly more
positive emotion being expressed following adequate sleep
and the same holding true for expression of negative emotion
after poor sleep.

From a mix of quantitative and qualitative analyses, we alto-
gether observed a cycle of disruption wherein students get in-
sufﬁcient sleep; cyberloaf the next day due to problems with
attention, cognition, or mood; are consequently unproduc-
tive; and ultimately again lose sleep staying up to compen-
sate for misused time. Though this theme emerged across
participants, multiple other factors – both short-term or more
permanent – can of course inﬂuence levels of technology use
and behaviors related to sleep, and broader work is needed
to identify such individual circumstances, some of which our
interviews glimpsed. Nonetheless, we emphasize the impor-
tance of designing technology that strikes a balance between
affording social connection while encouraging moderate us-
age as to not introduce biological disruption.

Overall, our ﬁndings relate to the larger notion of the compli-
cated interplay between technology use, sleep, and circadian
traits. For instance, we saw sleep behaviors and incidence of
social jet lag varying by chronotype; and we observed that
increased levels of social media use were associated with sig-
niﬁcantly more lost sleep, which in turn was related to fatigue,
cognition, and emotion.

PositiveNegativeSleep Duration (hours)-100.51Sentiment-0.5Over 9Under 5678Implications for Sleep Assessment and Intervention
A key motivation underlying our work is the development of
future generations of circadian intervention and stabilization
tools. As mentioned earlier, current technologies generally
fail to consider circadian rhythms in their monitoring and in-
tervention strategies. In response, our research provides com-
putational techniques and design recommendations that can
contribute to the creation of novel systems that may consid-
erably enhance such interventions. Two directions stand out.

First, technologies can capitalize on patterns of interaction in
order to diagnose current circadian misalignments as well as
to detect whether or not behavioral trends are likely to lead
to future disruptions. For instance, a key ﬁrst step is provid-
ing feedback to increase users’ awareness about how certain
patterns of technology use may act as a gateway to lost sleep,
procrastination, or depressed mood.

Second, we envision circadian-aware systems that can sense
and respond to individual variations in order to more accu-
rately model daily functioning and supply interventions in
line with innate biological preferences. As examples, systems
offering sleep advice could be tailored to each user’s genetic
and environmental conditions. A circadian-attuned calen-
dar could schedule different types of activities such as meet-
ings and exercise based on individual chronotypes. Home-
based light therapy could automatically cue light exposure at
optimal times, while patients undergoing treatment for pain
could receive reminder notiﬁcations to administer medication
at times ideal for delivery.

Limitations and Future Work
As discussed previously, individual differences in circadian
variables can vary dramatically. A larger-scale study would
therefore be desirable in order to see how well our ﬁndings
hold and to study a wider sample of participants – for in-
stance, of more diverse age groups, genders, and chronotypes
as well as individuals living with affective illnesses such as
bipolar disorder, who could beneﬁt immensely from tech-
nologies designed to support circadian rhythm stabilization.
Similarly, extending our study to a longer time frame and to
additional geographical regions would allow measurement of
circadian variations over the course of seasonal and yearly
cycles and across multiple time zones and latitudes.

The types of data and analyses performed can also be ex-
panded going forward. Qualitative analysis of more fre-
quently conducted interviews could help to further unpack
and explain our quantitative observations regarding relation-
ships among technology use, sleep, and neurobehavioral
functioning. Such data might also enable the identiﬁcation
of additional edge cases in order to incorporate more infor-
mative features and make sensing more robust. Similarly,
future iterations of our sleep sensing algorithm can incorpo-
rate additional forms of socially-computable signals, for in-
stance from emails or from social media platforms beyond
Facebook. Such enhancement may not only improve sleep
inference accuracy through increased amounts of behavioral
data but could also allow the examination of why and how in-
dividuals exhibit different behaviors in different technology-

852

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

mediated social contexts and whether such variations relate
to circadian factors.

It would also be desirable to examine the effects of light –
including light emitted from devices, especially given our
ﬁndings regarding the use of technology at night. Light is
known to impact alertness, and light also plays a central role
in setting the biological clock and the timing of sleep, al-
though current empirical evidence suggests that the amount
of light required to have an impact is far more than that emit-
ted from electronic devices [8]. While the MCTQ contains
a question about daylight exposure on average, measurement
of daily sunlight as well as artiﬁcial light could be incorpo-
rated into analyses by including a question in participants’
self-reported sleep logs or by using data from phone sensing
toolkits’ light sensors. Such consideration of light could be
particularly valuable across study phases (e.g., Fall, Winter,
Spring), when differences in light-dark patterns may impact
our studied measures. Finally, though more burdensome for
participants, comparison with actigraphy measures as well as
exploring the use of body or environment based sensors could
also contribute to a more holistic representation of rhythms.

CONCLUSION
In this study, we explored the opportunity of social sensor
data to better understand, model, and predict patterns and
events related to sleep behaviors and disruptions. Using
phone probes, social media data, surveys, and interviews, we
analyzed daily trends in the usage of social technologies and
how such usage may both impact and reﬂect aspects of sleep
and its relation to other circadian processes. Bringing a con-
sideration of biological rhythms to bear enables the potential
for such research to go beyond simply describing how people
are using technology to get closer to why.

Pursuing this aim, we discovered daily usage patterns that
have not been previously examined, and we leveraged such
insights to develop lightweight computational techniques that
can predict sleep events and interruptions with an accuracy
comparable to approaches that are more obtrusive on users
and less feasible to deploy on a mass scale. In applying our
novel methods for sleep sensing, we revealed signiﬁcant dif-
ferences in neurobehavioral functioning following nights of
adequate vs. inadequate sleep – speciﬁcally, ﬁnding that lack
of quality sleep is associated with subsequently increased
cyberloaﬁng activity, diminished cognitive throughput, and
more negative mood.

Finally, we presented a vision of circadian-aware systems that
can take individual circadian variations into account when
modeling sleep and other chronobiological processes, and we
provided design recommendations that can be put into prac-
tice to develop more personalized technologies that are better
attuned to our individual circadian preferences and inherent
biological traits.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This material is based upon work supported by the Na-
tional Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship un-
der Grant No. DGE 1144153.

SESSION: SOCIAL LIFE

REFERENCES
1. Abdullah, S., Matthews, M., Murnane, E. L., Gay, G.,

and Choudhury, T. Towards circadian computing: early
to bed and early to rise makes some of us unhealthy and
sleep deprived. In Proceedings of the 2014 ACM
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and
Ubiquitous Computing, ACM (2014), 673–684.

2. Bai, Y., Xu, B., Ma, Y., Sun, G., and Zhao, Y. Will you

have a good sleep tonight?: sleep quality prediction with
mobile phone. In Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on Body Area Networks, ICST (2012),
124–130.

3. Bauer, J. S., Consolvo, S., Greenstein, B., Schooler, J.,

Wu, E., Watson, N. F., and Kientz, J. Shuteye:
encouraging awareness of healthy sleep
recommendations with a mobile, peripheral display. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
factors in computing systems, ACM (2012), 1401–1410.

4. Baumeister, R., Muraven, M., and Tice, D. Ego

depletion: A resource model of volition, self-regulation,
and controlled processing. Social cognition 18, 2 (2000),
130–150.

5. Bj¨ornsson, C. L¨asbarhet (readability) liber, 1968.

6. B¨ohmer, M., Hecht, B., Sch¨oning, J., Kr¨uger, A., and

Bauer, G. Falling asleep with angry birds, facebook and
kindle: a large scale study on mobile application usage.
In Proceedings of the 13th international conference on
Human computer interaction with mobile devices and
services, ACM (2011), 47–56.

7. Borb´ely, A. A. A two process model of sleep regulation.

Human neurobiology (1982).

8. Cajochen, C. Alerting effects of light. Sleep medicine

reviews 11, 6 (2007), 453–464.

9. Carskadon, M. A., Acebo, C., and Jenni, O. G.

Regulation of adolescent sleep: implications for
behavior. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
1021, 1 (2004), 276–291.

10. Chen, M.-Y., Wang, E. K., and Jeng, Y.-J. Adequate

sleep among adolescents is positively associated with
health status and health-related behaviors. BMC Public
Health 6, 1 (2006), 59.

11. Chen, Z., Lin, M., Chen, F., Lane, N. D., Cardone, G.,

Wang, R., Li, T., Chen, Y., Choudhury, T., and
Campbell, A. T. Unobtrusive sleep monitoring using
smartphones. In Pervasive Computing Technologies for
Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2013 7th International
Conference on, IEEE (2013), 145–152.

12. Costa, P. T., and McCrae, R. R. Revised Neo Personality

Inventory (NEO-PI-R) and NEO Five-Factor Inventory
(NEO-FFI). Psychological Assesment Resources, 1992.

13. Crowley, S. J., Acebo, C., and Carskadon, M. A. Sleep,
circadian rhythms, and delayed phase in adolescence.
Sleep medicine 8, 6 (2007), 602–612.

853

14. Duggan, M., Ellison, N., Lampe, C., Lenhart, A., and
Madden, M. Social media update 2014. Pew Research
Center (2015).

15. Hao, T., Xing, G., and Zhou, G. isleep: unobtrusive
sleep quality monitoring using smartphones. In
Proceedings of the 11th ACM Conference on Embedded
Networked Sensor Systems, ACM (2013), 4.

16. Harvey, A. G. Sleep and circadian rhythms in bipolar
disorder: seeking synchrony, harmony, and regulation.
American journal of psychiatry 165, 7 (2008), 820–829.

17. Heslop, P., Smith, G. D., Metcalfe, C., Macleod, J., and
Hart, C. Sleep duration and mortality: the effect of short
or long sleep duration on cardiovascular and all-cause
mortality in working men and women. Sleep medicine 3,
4 (2002), 305–314.

18. Hursh, S. R., Redmond, D. P., Johnson, M. L., Thorne,
D. R., Belenky, G., Balkin, T. J., Storm, W. F., Miller,
J. C., and Eddy, D. R. Fatigue models for applied
research in warﬁghting. Aviation, space, and
environmental medicine 75, Supplement 1 (2004),
A44–A53.

19. Hutto, C., Yardi, S., and Gilbert, E. A longitudinal study
of follow predictors on twitter. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, ACM (2013), 821–830.

20. John, O. P., Donahue, E. M., and Kentle, R. L. The big

ﬁve inventory: Versions 4a and 54, institute of
personality and social research. University of California,
Berkeley, CA (1991).

21. Juda, M., Vetter, C., and Roenneberg, T. The munich

chronotype questionnaire for shift-workers (mctqshift).
Journal of biological rhythms 28, 2 (2013), 130–140.

22. Kamdar, B. B., Kaplan, K. A., Kezirian, E. J., and

Dement, W. C. The impact of extended sleep on daytime
alertness, vigilance, and mood. Sleep medicine 5, 5
(2004), 441–448.

23. Kay, M., Choe, E. K., Shepherd, J., Greenstein, B.,

Watson, N., Consolvo, S., and Kientz, J. A. Lullaby: a
capture & access system for understanding the sleep
environment. In Proceedings of the 2012 Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing, ACM (2012), 226–234.

24. Keyes, K. M., Maslowsky, J., Hamilton, A., and

Schulenberg, J. The great sleep recession: Changes in
sleep duration among us adolescents, 1991–2012.
Pediatrics (2015), 460–468.

25. Kreitzman, L., and Foster, R. The Rhythms Of Life: The
Biological Clocks That Control the Daily Lives of Every
Living Thing. Proﬁle Books, 2011.

26. Krejcar, O., Jirka, J., and Janckulik, D. Use of mobile
phones as intelligent sensors for sound input analysis
and sleep state detection. Sensors 11, 6 (2011),
6037–6055.

27. Lee, U., Lee, J., Ko, M., Lee, C., Kim, Y., Yang, S.,
Yatani, K., Gweon, G., Chung, K.-M., and Song, J.
Hooked on smartphones: an exploratory study on
smartphone overuse among college students. In
Proceedings of the 32nd annual conference on Human
factors in computing systems, ACM (2014), 2327–2336.

28. Li, I., Dey, A., and Forlizzi, J. A stage-based model of
personal informatics systems. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, ACM (2010), 557–566.

29. Lim, V. The it way of loaﬁng on the job: cyberloaﬁng,
neutralizing and organizational justice. Journal of
Organizational Behavior 23, 5 (2002), 675–694.

30. Mark, G., Wang, Y., and Niiya, M. Stress and

multitasking in everyday college life: an empirical study
of online activity. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual
ACM conference on Human factors in computing
systems, ACM (2014), 41–50.

31. Min, J.-K., Doryab, A., Wiese, J., Amini, S.,

Zimmerman, J., and Hong, J. I. Toss’n’turn: smartphone
as sleep and sleep quality detector. In Proceedings of the
32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in
computing systems, ACM (2014), 477–486.

32. Moturu, S. T., Khayal, I., Aharony, N., Pan, W., and

Pentland, A. S. Using social sensing to understand the
links between sleep, mood, and sociability. In Privacy,
Security, Risk and Trust (PASSAT) and 2011 IEEE Third
International Conference on Social Computing
(SocialCom), IEEE (2011), 208–214.

33. Muraven, M., Baumeister, R. F., and Tice, D. M.

Longitudinal improvement of self-regulation through
practice: Building self-control strength through repeated
exercise. The Journal of social psychology 139, 4
(1999), 446–457.

34. Murnane, E. L., and Counts, S. Unraveling abstinence

and relapse: smoking cessation reﬂected in social media.
In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on
Human factors in computing systems, ACM (2014),
1345–1354.

35. National Sleep Foundation. Technology use and sleep.

http://www.sleepfoundation.org, 2011.

36. Oginska, H., and Pokorski, J. Fatigue and mood

correlates of sleep length in three age-social groups:
School children, students, and employees.
Chronobiology international 23, 6 (2006), 1317–1328.

37. Patel, S., Ayas, N., Malhotra, M., White, D.,

Schernhammer, E., Speizer, F., Stampfer, M., and Hu, F.
A prospective study of sleep duration and mortality risk
in women. SLEEP 27, 3 (2004), 440–444.

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

38. Pew Research Internet Project. Cell phones and

American adults, 2010.

39. Roenneberg, T. Internal time: Chronotypes, social jet

lag, and why you’re so tired. Harvard Univ. Press, 2012.

40. Roenneberg, T. Chronobiology: The human sleep
project. Nature 498, 7455 (2013), 427–428.

41. Roenneberg, T., Allebrandt, K. V., Merrow, M., and

Vetter, C. Social jetlag and obesity. Current Biology 22,
10 (2012), 939–943.

42. Roenneberg, T., Keller, L. K., Fischer, D., Matera, J. L.,
Vetter, C., and Winnebeck, E. C. Human activity and
rest in situ. Methods in Enzymology (2015).

43. Roenneberg, T., Kuehnle, T., Juda, M., Kantermann, T.,

Allebrandt, K., Gordijn, M., and Merrow, M.
Epidemiology of the human circadian clock. Sleep
medicine reviews 11, 6 (2007), 429–438.

44. Roenneberg, T., Kuehnle, T., Pramstaller, P. P., Ricken,
J., Havel, M., Guth, A., and Merrow, M. A marker for
the end of adolescence. Current Biology 14, 24 (2004),
R1038–R1039.

45. Roenneberg, T., Wirz-Justice, A., and Merrow, M. Life
between clocks: daily temporal patterns of human
chronotypes. Journal of biological rhythms 18, 1 (2003),
80–90.

46. Taylor, D. J., and Bramoweth, A. D. Patterns and

consequences of inadequate sleep in college students:
substance use and motor vehicle accidents. Journal of
Adolescent Health 46, 6 (2010), 610–612.

47. Van den Bulck, J. Text messaging as a cause of sleep

interruption in adolescents, evidence from a
cross-sectional study. Journal of Sleep Research 12, 3
(2003), 263–263.

48. Viola, A. U., Archer, S. N., James, L. M., Groeger, J. A.,
Lo, J. C., Skene, D. J., von Schantz, M., and Dijk, D.-J.
Per3 polymorphism predicts sleep structure and waking
performance. Current Biology 17, 7 (2007), 613–618.

49. Wagner, D. T., Barnes, C. M., Lim, V. K., and Ferris,
D. L. Lost sleep and cyberloaﬁng: Evidence from the
laboratory and a daylight saving time quasi-experiment.
Journal of Applied Psychology 97, 5 (2012), 1068.

50. Wittmann, M., Dinich, J., Merrow, M., and Roenneberg,
T. Social jetlag: misalignment of biological and social
time. Chronobiology international 23, 1-2 (2006),
497–509.

51. Yang, A., Palmer, A. A., and de Wit, H. Genetics of
caffeine consumption and responses to caffeine.
Psychopharmacology 211, 3 (2010), 245–257.

854

