CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Steps, Choices and Moral Accounting: Observations from 
a Step-Counting Campaign in the Workplace 

Nanna Gorm & Irina Shklovski 
IT University of Copenhagen 
Denmark 
{nanj, irsh}@itu.dk 

ABSTRACT 
Sedentary work is a contributing factor to growing obesity 
levels  worldwide.  Research  shows  that  step-counters  can 
offer a way to motivate greater physical mobility. We pre-
sent  an  in-situ  study  of  a  nation-wide  workplace  step-
counting campaign. Our findings show that in the context of 
the  workplace  steps  are  a  socially  negotiated  quantity  and 
that  participation  in  the  campaign  has  an  impact  on  those 
who  volunteer  to  participate  and  those  who  opt-out.  We 
highlight  that  specific  health  promotion  initiatives  do  not 
operate  in  a  vacuum,  but  are  experienced  as  one  out  of 
many efforts offered to the employees. Using a social ecol-
ogy lens we illustrate how conceptualizing a step-counting 
campaign  as  a  health  promotion  rather  than  a  behavior 
change effort can have implications for what is construed as 
success.  

Author Keywords 
Self-tracking;  workplace;  pedometer;  health  promotion; 
campaign; step-counter; social ecology; 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 

INTRODUCTION 
The  increasing  trend  toward  desk-based  sedentary  work 
appears  to  contribute  to  the  growing  levels  of  obesity 
worldwide,  which  is  a  known  risk  factor  associated  with 
diabetes,  cancer  and  cardiovascular  disease  [11].  Research 
in health informatics [13], health-behavior change [30] and 
quantified  self  [2,8]  suggests  that  personal  tracking  tech-
nologies such as step-counters can be used to motivate im-
provements  in  daily  mobility  [38].  In  fact,  Maitland  notes 
that  pedometers  are  the  most  commonly  used  technologies 
in behavior change efforts [21]. Even though the durability 
of positive health changes and the long-term effects of step-

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal  or  classroom  use  is  granted  without  fee  provided  that  copies  are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  the  author(s)  must  be 
honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or 
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
CSCW '16, February 27-March 02, 2016, San Francisco, CA, USA 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to 
ACM.
ACM 978-1-4503-3592-8/16/02...$15.00
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819944

counters  remain  unknown,  there  is  ample  evidence  that  in 
the  short-term,  the  use  of  these  technologies  can  indeed 
improve  physical  mobility  [16,19,35].  As  pedometers  gain 
in popularity we see examples of broad health and physical 
exercise  campaign  deployments  to  get  people  moving,  tar-
geting  the  workplace  (e.g.  10000stepsusa.com  in  the  US, 
and tælskridt.dk in Denmark). These campaigns rely on the 
seeming simplicity of the step-counter technology to facili-
tate  or  encourage  mobility.  As  the  use  of  step-counters  in 
the workplace becomes integrated with insurance premiums 
and  other  financial  incentives  [6]  it  is  important  to  go  be-
yond  the  question  of  whether  or  not  these  campaigns  are 
successful  given  the  narrowly  defined  goal  of  increasing 
mobility by counting steps. We asked what does a national 
step-counting  workplace  campaign  look  like,  in  practice? 
How does the use of step-counters fit with social practices 
within a workplace where both users and non-users are co-
located and interact on a daily basis? Finally, how might we 
re-define  the  notion  of  success  of  campaign  efforts  going 
beyond the quantitative measures of steps and durations?  

Based  on  observations  from  a  Danish  workplace  we  offer 
insights into practical and social experiences of a voluntary 
national  three-week  long  step-counting  campaign  in  one 
particular department of an organization where the majority 
of employees chose to participate. We address how an indi-
vidually  focused  technology,  such  as  the  step-counter,  can 
become  integrated  in  and  is  experienced  as  part  of  the 
workplace.  Although  many  of  the  technology-design  for 
behavior  change  interventions  tend  to  narrowly  focus  on 
targeting  specific  behaviors,  we  illustrate  how  a  behavior 
change strategy to ‘get people walking’ may not be quite as 
straight  forward  and  instrumental  as  expected  and  discuss 
insights  relevant  to  future  technological  interventions  tar-
geting  promotion  of  healthier  behaviors  in  the  workplace. 
Finally, we propose that evaluations of these efforts would 
benefit from including an ecological lens as part of technol-
ogy  use  for  health  promotion  [21],  concluding  with  a  dis-
cussion of broader considerations for CSCW research.  

BACKGROUND 
Although the actual effect of step-counters is widely debat-
ed,  a  systematic  review  conducted  by  Bravata  and  col-
leagues  concluded  that  sustained  use  of  pedometers  was 
indeed  associated  with  increases  in  physical  activity  that 
resulted in positive health effects such as decreases in BMI 
and  blood  pressure  [3].  Step-counters  often  promote  a 

148

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

standard  goal  of  10.000  steps  a  day,  which  is  an  arbitrary 
and somewhat random number [38]. Nevertheless, research 
has  shown  that  this  number  is  similar  to  the  recommenda-
tions  of  US  public  health  guidelines,  and  Danish  health 
authorities1,  recommending  30  minutes  of  moderate  physi-
cal activity per day for adults [38].  

Off-the-shelf activity sensing wearable technologies such as 
Fitbit, Jawbone or Nike FuelBand and smartphone trackers 
and health apps such as My Fitness Pal have been the focus 
of  extensive  research  in  HCI  and  CSCW  [13,30].  Earlier 
studies demonstrated that positive reinforcements [19], user 
control over data visualization and interpretation [2] and the 
ability  for  users  to  set  their  own  primary  and  secondary 
goals  [24]  were  key  for  technology-based  health  interven-
tions to be fruitful. Later work focused on more qualitative 
and  in-situ  investigations.  Fritz  et  al.  conducted  an  exten-
sive study of in the wild long-term use of activity tracking 
devices  noting  that  the  goals  and  needs  of  long-term  users 
change  over  time  and  need  to  be  supported  by  technology 
designers [13]. Rooksby et al. explored the lived experience 
of  using  multiple  step-counting  and  tracking  technologies, 
emphasizing  that  people  weave  the  use  of  these  technolo-
gies  into  their  everyday  practices  with  behavior  change 
happening  across  multiple  technologies  over  time  rather 
than  through  the  use  of  one  particular  device  [30].  Most 
importantly  these  and  many  other  studies  have  noted  the 
decidedly social nature of health technology use that comes 
with its own issues and benefits [8,10,20]. 

The Social Context of Health Technologies 
Even early on, researchers realized that focusing exclusive-
ly on the individual and their internal motivations in health 
behavior change efforts may not be as productive, and that 
practical constraints should be considered [7]. For example 
one  early  study  of  women,  who  wanted  to  be  more  physi-
cally active, identified key implications for design require-
ments that included paying attention to practical constraints 
of  users’  everyday  lives  [7].  Later  studies,  concerned  with 
sharing  of  personal  achievements  with  physical  activity 
have  had  to  acknowledge  the  social  context  within  which 
these activities are conducted, thus addressing privacy con-
cerns [10]. Similarly, the focus on whether these technolo-
gies  are  successful  in  lowering  BMI,  increasing  mobility 
and  other  quantitative  markers  tends  to  overlook  the  more 
qualitative aspects of the lived experience with these devic-
es. Maitland has proposed to consider a negotiation frame-
work  to  include  a  broader  range  of  resources  individuals 
have access to and constraints they may experience as part 
of the design process [21].  

Research shows that social support and social pressure posi-
tively  influence  user  motivation [4,18]  and  participation  in 
teams  increases  activity  levels  [1,4,16].  Yet  any  effort  to-
ward behavior change, whether it is internally motivated by 

1

https://www.sundhed.dk/borger/sundhed-og-
forebyggelse/livsstil/motion/motion/ 

the  individuals  or  externally  motivated  through  health-
focused interventions, involves a re-alignment of accounta-
bilities [12,37]. By design step-counters make the embodied 
physical action of walking into a practice of counting. Why 
people  do  the  walking  that  is  counted  by  the  device  then 
can  become  an  important  point  of  discussion  especially  in 
the context of efforts that rely on forms of gaming or com-
petitiveness [1,19,27]. Buis et al. observed this in their stud-
ies  of  team-based  online  health  interventions  [4],  showing 
how  individuals  participating  in  team-based  step-counting 
initiatives  become  accountable  to  each  other  for  both  the 
number of the steps they take and their reasons for walking. 

Activity Sensing in the Workplace 
Despite the range of research on behavior change few stud-
ies have focused on the workplace – a context where seden-
tary  practices  are  becoming  ever  more  prevalent.  Several 
studies have recruited from workplace settings, due to ease 
of access to e-mail lists, but these did not consider the use 
of the step-counter in the workplace as a focus area, nor the 
influence  of  the  workplace  as  a  specific  social  setting 
[4,19,29]. Current research in HCI on improving workplace 
activity  is  preoccupied  with  adding  more  sensors  to  the 
worker,  who  can  then  for  example  track  their  posture  and 
stretching  statistics  [27],  or  with  developing  new  physical 
movement  probes,  such  as  an  active  desk  or  an  irritating 
chair [35]. Yet health-incentives in the workplace are not a 
new development and integrations of technology into health 
campaigns and insurance incentive initiatives are ongoing.  

In  an  overview  of  health  data  collection  in  the  workplace, 
Christophersen  et  al.  note  that  such  practices  can  result  in 
significant  challenges  causing  employees  to  game  the  sys-
tem  in  order  to  combat  potential  financial  penalties  due  to 
low  step-count  numbers  or  other  health  indicators  [6]. 
Zulman et al. conducted a study of one workplace insurance 
incentivized  walking  programs  and  found  that  despite  ex-
tremely  high  participation  levels  participants  disliked  the 
program [41]. In contrast, Chan et al., Vyas et al. and Buis 
et al. studied voluntary workplace health and physical activ-
ity  interventions  and  campaigns,  finding  that  participants 
had positive experiences and, in the case of Chan et al. and 
Vyas  et  al.  demonstrating  short-term  success  of  the  pro-
grams [4,5,39]. Miller et al. quantitatively demonstrated an 
ostensibly  successful  implementation  of  a  step-counting 
initiative  by  increasing  physical  activity  levels  in  pupils 
[22].  Yet  their  qualitative  investigation  uncovered  signifi-
cant amounts of unpaid “hidden work” conducted by teach-
ers to ensure success, when this seemingly simple initiative 
rolled  out  [23].  In  all  cases,  researchers  reported  that  the 
social aspects of the program were highly influential, espe-
cially in those studies that employed a qualitative approach. 

Where are the Non-users? 
Despite the fact that research has repeatedly recognized the 
importance of the social and environmental aspects of expe-
rience with using activity-tracking technologies, few studies 
have  focused  on  this.  Within  the  area  of  health  technolo-

149

                                                             
gies,  Munson  has  considered  the  notion  of  “cessation  of 
use” as an analytical concept worth addressing but this does 
not  cover  those  that  opt  out  of  participation  entirely  [26]. 
Rooksby  et  al.  detailed  some  of  the  social  experiences  of 
the health technology users they tracked [30] and Maitland 
noted  that  technology  users  must  negotiate  with  others 
around  them  to  enable  their  successful  implementation  of 
behavior  change  [21].  Yet  none  of  these  researchers  have 
considered the role of the non-users of health tracking in the 
context  of  use.  Non-use  of  technology  has  previously  re-
ceived  attention  in  the  literature  questioning  assumptions 
about appropriateness of technology, considering the social 
role  of  non-use,  or  trying  to  understand  why  people  might 
choose  to  or  be  forced  to  not  use  technology  [2,31,33].  In 
the  study  at  hand  we  consider  specifically  what  happens 
when a large proportion of people in a workplace voluntari-
ly begin using step-counters and continue to work alongside 
those who do not use these technologies for a range of rea-
sons. Considerations  of  both  use  and  non-use  require  a 
broader  perspective  than  individual  targeting  and  to  do  so 
we draw on the social ecological approach. 

Social ecological approach 
One  of  the  most  common  goals  in  HCI  research  on  health 
behavior  change  is  to  evaluate  the  rate  of  uptake  and  suc-
cess  of  technologies  and  interventions.  Concerns  with 
healthy  life-styles  and  behavior  change  have  also  been  a 
staple  in  health  promotion  with  research  in  the  fields  of 
communication, sociology, psychology, social ecology and 
public health focusing on identifying processes and practic-
es that may or may not be effective. In this article we rely 
on  Stokols’  “social  ecology  model  for  health  promotion” 
which  proposes  a  holistic  approach  balancing  individual 
and environmental foci [34].  

The  social  ecological  approach  suggests  that  the  focus  of 
health  promotion  initiatives  should  be  on  both  behavioral 
and environmental levels. Social refers to the acknowledg-
ment that individual behavior is shaped by their social and 
cultural  contexts.  Yet  individuals  also  have  the  possibility 
to  influence  physical  and  social  features  of  their  settings. 
The framework relies on the concepts of active and passive 
elements  of  health  promotion  initiatives.  Typically,  envi-
ronmentally  focused  elements  are  passive,  as  they  require 
no  action  on  behalf  of  the  user.  Active  elements,  on  the 
other hand, are often at the core of behavioral change mod-
els for example, requiring on-going and voluntary effort to 
reap  benefits  [34].  Health  promotion  initiatives  incorporat-
ing both active and passive elements are more likely to have 
lasting  effects,  as  they  are  designed  to  intervene  at  both 
situational  and  personal  levels  [34].  For  example,  offering 
smoking  cessation  courses  or  hotlines  (active  element), 
while  also  introducing  smoking  bans  in  public  places,  or 
raising  tobacco  prices  (passive  elements),  jointly  increases 
the chance of smoking cessation.  

In  this  paper  we  investigate  how  a  nation-wide  step-
counting campaign is experienced in situ in a specific work 

150

SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

environment.  Arguably,  a  step-counting  campaign  has  a 
narrow  focus  on  a  specific  behavior  in  the  service  of  ‘get-
ting people walking’. The marker of success then might be 
how many people increased how much they walked during 
the campaign and how many continued with the use of pe-
dometers  after  the  campaign  ends.  At  first  glance,  there  is 
little here that might speak to the social ecology model yet 
our findings suggest that there are plenty of active and pas-
sive elements to campaign implementation that rely on both 
individual and environmental factors. 

A  social  ecological  approach  makes  it  possible  to  discuss 
non-use more broadly than has been the case in individually 
focused  studies,  where  non-use  is  often  understood  as  a 
shortfall of the individual [28,32]. Social ecology is a way 
of  thinking  about  behavior  change  as  a  social  experience, 
that considers how a combination of active and passive el-
ements  is  important  for  lasting  impact  [34].  Consequently, 
we  can  go  beyond  the  common  question  of  ‘did  it  work?’ 
By  construing  the  step-counting  campaign  as  a  health  pro-
motion rather than a behavior change initiative [21] we can 
focus on how and why users utilize step-counters alongside 
considerations  of  non-use  and  the  broader  context  of  cam-
paign deployment [17]. This study adds to prior studies by 
looking  at  users  and  non-users  of  step-counters  in  a  social 
setting of the workplace. By investigating what the experi-
ence  is  like  for  employees  in  a  particular  department,  our 
study  considers  encounters  with  the  health  campaign  pro-
moting step-counters at both site-level and individual level. 

RESEARCH CONTEXT 

The campaign 
Tæl  Skridt  (Count  Steps)  is  a  bi-annual  three-week  long 
health promotion initiative conducted in the spring and fall 
by the Danish Company Sports association. The goal of the 
campaign is to walk at least 10.000 steps for 11 out of the 
21 campaign days. If this goal is met, the team enters a lot-
tery  with  a  1st  prize  of  50.000  DKK.  In  the  2015  spring 
campaign  18.112  employees  participated  across  Denmark. 
Many of the private and public sector employers offer par-
ticipation in this campaign as a voluntary health promotion 
initiative  to  employees  who  then  organize  themselves  and 
engage with the campaign directly.  

Generally  employees  have  to  pay  to  participate  although 
some  companies  do  cover  the  fee  (50DKK).  Employees  in 
participating companies sign up as teams, elect a team cap-
tain,  and  commit  to  wearing  a  pedometer  sensor  of  some 
kind  –  either  a  step-counter  or  an  app  downloaded  to  their 
smartphone,  resulting  in  a  significant  diversity  of  devices. 
Each  participant  has  a  personal  login  and  must  manually 
enter  their  daily  number  of  steps  on  the  website,  or  have 
their team captain do it. The campaign website offers man-
ual  converters  so  that  participants  can  include  activities 
such as cycling, swimming, golf or house chores, into their 
daily  step-counting  totals.  The  website  provides  an  over-
view  of  step  totals  for  individual  participants  and  teams. 
Every  participant  can  see  step  count  totals  of  other  teams, 

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

and  step  counts  of  other  participants  they  might  choose  to 
challenge. Employees can choose to sign up with their own 
name  or  company  initials.  Within  the  department  under 
study we observed that employees could identify each other 
on the site regardless of the username choices. 

The Tæl Skridt campaign began as a purely internet medi-
ated health promotion program, but as pedometers gained in 
popularity  these  were  added  because  it  simplified  activity 
reporting,  resulting  in  a  substantial  increase  in  the  number 
of participants. In a phone interview the campaign manager 
noted  that  the  least  physically  active  participants  are  more 
active  during,  and  after  the  campaign,  based  on  subjective 
measures prior to and 5 months after the campaign.  

The company 
The  Danish  company  under  study  is  relatively  large  with 
more  than  2.000  employees,  offices  in  several  locations 
inside of Denmark, and a few offices abroad. The company 
handles  and  invests  customer  savings  and  thus  employees 
engage with a range of technologies for work tasks, result-
ing in a generally tech savvy workforce. The site of obser-
vation was one of the departments at the headquarters of the 
company.  The  department  contains  three  sub-sections 
spread  over  two  open  office  spaces,  divided  by  a  hallway 
with a coffee/ tea area. The three sections deal with differ-
ent focus areas, but work cuts across the sections, and they 
jointly participate in weekly department meetings.   

According  to  the  Tæl  Skridt  campaign  organizers  the  ma-
jority of participants in the campaign were involved in sed-
entary  work  practices,  and  had  no  direct  relation  with  the 
self-tracking  industry2.  This  defined  our  criteria  for  select-
ing the company to study. The company and its employees 
were unknown to the authors prior to the start of the study. 
We  were  able  to  gain  access  through  a  university  contact. 
Prior  to  the  start  of  the  campaign  the  first  author  briefly 
explained the methods and goals of the study when she was 
introduced  to  the  entire  staff  at  a  department  meeting  and 
obtained permission to conduct the study. 

METHODS 
In conducting the study we relied on traditional ethnograph-
ic  methods  of  observation,  informal  interaction  and  semi-
structured  interviewing  over  the  course  of  four  weeks  that 
included the three weeks of the campaign. The first author 
participated in work meetings, sat at a desk allocated to her 
in the open office space alongside the employees, joined in 
the  lunch  breaks,  department  meetings  and  Friday  break-
fasts,  and  generally  partook  in  the  daily  life  of  the  office 
during  12  workdays  in  March  2015.  Observations  were 
spread  out  to  include  time  pre-,  and  post  campaign.  These 
observations provided insight into the actual use of the step-
counters during office hours, as well as naturally occurring 
conversations  between  employees  in  the  open  office  and 
during walks to the coffee machine or cafeteria. The author 
will, necessarily, have prompted discussion of the technol-

2 Phone interview with campaign organizers 

ogy  merely  by  her  presence,  however,  only  joined  in  con-
versations on the step-counter when these were initiated by 
the employees. The author participated in conversations on 
all subjects, showing a broad interest in the work practices 
and life of the employees. Authors did not participate in the 
campaign  as  participation  requirements  prevented  this.  We 
conducted  semi-structured  follow-up  interviews  with  nine 
employees  after  the  step  counting  campaign  ended,  focus-
ing  on  participation/non-participation 
reflections  and 
thoughts on self-tracking technologies more generally.  

Counting full-, and part-time employees, as well as section 
leaders and interns, the department consisted of 28 employ-
ees (20 females and 8 males). 17 employees participated in 
the  campaign  (hereafter  participants),  while  11  employees 
did  not  participate  for  a  range  of  reasons  (hereafter  non-
participants). A few participants had devices from the prior 
year  or  had  their  own  step  counter  bought  outside  of  the 
campaign,  some  bought  new  step  counters,  while  others 
used apps on their smartphones.  

Field notes and interview transcripts were coded using open 
and iterative focused coding [9]. The two authors compared 
codes, engaging in an iterative process of analysis and writ-
ing  to  identify  main  themes  emergent  from  the  data.  To 
indicate data sources, the quotes presented below are denot-
ed  with  interview  for  follow  up  interviews,  or  observation 
for  observations  and  conversations  during  the  campaign. 
We use pseudonyms to refer to particular participants.  

FINDINGS 
We  identified  four  emergent  themes  from  the  observations 
and follow-up interviews. We begin by considering the so-
cial nature of counting steps and the new sorts of accounta-
bilities that emerge from this activity. As more than a third 
of  the  employees  could  not  or  did  not  participate  in  the 
campaign  we  discuss  their  reasons  and  their  experience. 
Finally,  we  consider  the  outcomes  of  the  campaign  and 
what insights applying a social ecology lens can produce.  

Social negotiations of steps 
The  technical  implementation  of  step  counters  calls  little 
attention to just what is this step that is being counted. For 
the  most  part,  pedometers  promote  the  idea  that  counting 
steps is a simple process with step being an obvious curren-
cy. Yet from the start of the campaign and continuing into 
the first week we observed participants putting considerable 
effort into figuring out what counted as a step. For example, 
step counters worn on the body may count steps differently 
than  cellphone  apps.  Participants  struggled  to  figure  out 
whether  the  differences  in  their  final  step  counts  stemmed 
from differences across devices or differences between par-
ticipants (that some were just more active). In the beginning 
of  the  campaign  participants  would  jump  up  and  down  or 
shake  their  device,  to  see  what  made  it  count  a  step.  Col-
leagues  would  walk  next  to  each  other  to  the  canteen  and 
back,  and  then  compare  how  many  steps  their  respective 
devices had counted. While we observed such experiments 
among  participants  who  used  the  same  type  of  device,  the 

151

                                                             
SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

diversity of step-counting devices used in the campaign no 
doubt contributed to how frequently and extensively partic-
ipants engaged in these: 

their  specific  needs,  but  that  they  also  could  perceive  as 
precise and fair in the context of competitive step-counting. 
Consider the following discussion:  

Erica and Jane discussed step counting during a casual 
talk  by  the  coffee  machine.  Erica  explained  how  she 
had  been  for  a  run,  and  knew  that  the  run  was  4.5km, 
but that the mobile app only registered 2km. “So I de-
cided to buy a step-counter” she explained.  

Jane  replied:  “I’ve  had  several  apps  in  order  to  com-
pare  them,  but  right  now  I  use  the  one  called  ‘Walka-
bout’.  Yesterday  I  just  needed  500  more  steps  on  the 
way  home  from  the  station  and  I  was  thinking  to  my-
self that that would add up perfectly, but then it ran out 
of battery. Really annoying!” 

(Female participants, observation week 1) 

This confusion about step counting was further perpetuated 
because  of  the  online  converter  schema.  The  campaign 
website allowed participants to convert any physical activi-
ties  they  liked  into  a  number  of  steps  calculated  via  a  for-
mula  that  included  activity  type,  duration  and  intensity. 
Participants  looked  up  an  activity,  entered  the  amount  of 
time spent on it, and the level of intensity and the converter 
calculated the number of steps. In this way, nearly any ac-
tivity  could  be  reduced  to  steps.  In  the  office  one  day,  a 
female participant started a discussion amongst participants 
when she tried to figure out how many steps her swimming 
session added up to, puzzling over the level of intensity:  

Rachel:  Maybe  I  just  felt  like  it  was  intense!  It  just 
adds up to a crazy amount of steps. Maybe it was only 
55 minutes if I have to be completely honest. So I had 
6258  steps  from  yesterday,  plus  10577  from  swim-
ming. Just imagine that it’s so efficient to swim! 

[Participants  discuss  whether  it  is  really  true  that 
swimming amounts to so many steps] 

Rachel: Now I am not behind anymore. I am incredibly 
motivated to swim some more! 

(Female participant, observation week 1) 

Although  many  participants  appreciated  the  ability  to  con-
vert  other  activities  into  steps,  discussions  and  self-
reflections  such  as  the  observations  described  above  were 
frequent  and  ranged  from  figuring  out  the  mechanics  of 
converters  to  needling  each  other  over  whether  swimming 
really  should  be  counted  for  as  many  steps  as  running.  In 
this way, the steps counted by the devices were not taken as 
objective  truths,  and  questions  about  intensity  levels  were 
genuinely considered as an issue to be reasoned about. 

Fairness and moral accounting of steps 
The process of becoming familiar with step-counting tech-
nologies meant that participants had to discover and negoti-
ate the faults and benefits of their personal choices in which 
technologies  to  use.  Some  participants  switched  out  devic-
es, or tried out new apps, to find something that not only fit 

Jonas: Yes, I think it might also count when you bike 
or something, I mean so I just saw how much I would 
get when I walked the dog and then of course I would 
count  that  in,  but  some  of  the  other  things  I  didn’t 
count  in  because  that  was  too  much,  it  was  like  it 
counted too many… 

Interviewer: It counted too much? 

Jonas: I just felt like it was a bit too high 

Interviewer: And then you adjusted it 

Jonas: So it wasn't unreasonable  

(Male participant, interview) 

In  the  excerpt  above  Jonas  can  only  know  that  his  step 
counter  counted  too  many  steps  because  he  has  compared 
across  apps,  and  compared  with  other  participants.  In  this 
way  he  was  able  to  adjust  his  step  count  to  a  number  that 
was not “too much.” To Jonas as well as to many other par-
ticipants  step  counting  was  clearly  not  a  straightforward 
activity,  but  at  least  initially  required  some  evaluation  and 
negotiation.  The  counting  of  steps  then  was  also  a  kind  of 
moral reasoning, judging fairness towards other participants 
as well as personal achievement through numbers [14]. In a 
discussion  of  moral  action  Johnson  [14:62]  argues  that 
moral  reasoning  is  guided  through  metaphor  and  that  "the 
logic of the metaphor determines our expectations, our rea-
soning, and our action." He proposes moral accounting as a 
metaphor that is concerned with what we owe other people 
and  what  they  owe  us  –  a  kind  of  transaction  oriented  to-
wards increasing our own and their well being. In the social 
context  of  competitive  counting  of  calories,  steps  or  other 
quantified health-related bodily performance indicators, the 
metaphor  of  moral  accounting  is  useful  for  thinking  about 
how  people  might  reason  about  their  "duties,  rights  and 
obligations" towards each other [14:55]. 

Over time participants began to agree on how many steps a 
given activity ought to amount to, or how fair a device was. 
While  the  design  of  the  Tæl  Skridt  campaign  allowed  par-
ticipants  to  engage  in  the  types  of  activity  they  preferred 
and not just focusing on walking steps, the common goal of 
10.000 steps a day resulted in people attempting to compete 
on  equal  terms.  Yet  the  various  athletic  endeavors  were 
clearly  not  easily  reducible  to  the  step  metric  demanding 
moral choices and extensive social negotiation. 

There  are  several  reasons  why  participants  were  occupied 
with the accuracy and fairness of their devices and the con-
verter. The campaign took place in the social setting of the 
workplace,  and  participants  could  at  any  given  time  logon 
to  the  website  and  see  the  step  counts  of  their  colleagues. 
Impressions of how a colleague would do (or how well their 
count  was  thought  to  reflect  their  actual  activity  level)  in 

152

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

this  campaign  could  potentially  spill-over  into  the  general 
perception  of  that  person.  Since  devices  at  times  produced 
different step counts, figuring out how exactly that worked 
and  where  the  differences  stemmed  from  became  an  im-
portant topic, to make sure that the accumulated steps (and 
thus  the  self)  were  evaluated  as  moral,  reasonable  and  fair 
by others. Thus some participants were concerned with en-
tering  a  particular  amount  of  steps  to  the  website,  because 
they  wanted  to  be  perceived  as  fair  and  reasonable  col-
leagues.  Others,  however,  were  clearly  not  above  taking 
advantage  of  the  confusion  over  activity  converters  and 
occasionally nudging their averages higher. We occasional-
ly observed that the numbers entered on the campaign web-
site were suspiciously round – 7000, 8500, 9300, etc. 

As  such,  a  step  count  was  not  merely  an  accounting  of 
physical movement, but a socially negotiated quantity with 
moral valence. Thus for some, counting steps also involved 
moral  accounting  [14]  that  they  needed  to  perform  along-
side  noting  down  numbers  from  their  devices,  pointing  to 
the distinctly social nature of this activity.  

Group competition and accountabilities of walking 
Having decided how to work out the steps and conversions, 
the  conversation  among  participants  transitioned  into  fre-
quent  discussion  of  how  their  steps  were  reached.  Saying 
for example, “I reached about 15.000 steps yesterday” was 
followed  by  questions,  which  opened  up  to  discussions  of 
who  had  dogs  to  walk,  who  had  to  drive  to  work  and  thus 
could not walk as much, etc. This became a welcomed ice-
breaker,  an  occasion  for  colleagues  to  discuss  non-work 
related activities and to strike up conversations in those few 
minutes  before  a  meeting  starts,  at  the  coffee  machine,  or 
with  colleagues  that  are  in  the  periphery  of  ones  core  job 
tasks.  While  this  was  mostly  seen  as  a  net  benefit,  this 
could  also  at  times  result  in  potential  breaching  of 
work/private  boundaries.  Consider  the  following  conversa-
tion in a follow-up interview: 

Elizabeth: They would have to ask, and say, hey, how 
did you get to 20.000 steps? You must have been active 
during  the  weekend.  And  (colleague)  said,  that  I  had 
3400  steps  on  Sunday,  so  she  said,  did  you  have  a 
hangover, and I did (laughs). So… In that way 

Interviewer: But that wasn’t something you might have 
otherwise talked to her about? 

Elizabeth: No, I mean I can’t remember if it was me or 
her  who  said  it  first,  but  that’s  right,  you  do  reveal 
some things because of this. It is not an excuse to just 
say, I was lazy then… 

(Female participant, interview) 

This interest in the source of the steps during both work and 
non-work hours was obvious and persistent. After all, indi-
vidual  behavior  directly  affected  the  team  average.  In  this 
way, participants became accountable for their level of ac-
tivity  towards  their  teammates  regardless  of  when  said  ac-

tivity  was  supposed  to  occur.  Participants  tried  in  various 
ways  to  negotiate  these  new  accountabilities  towards  their 
colleagues,  for  example  by  creating  secondary  goals  and 
assuring similar expectancy levels within teams.  

Health behavior change studies have previously found that 
feelings of accountability made people more likely to fulfill 
their goals. Munson and Consolvo noted however that hav-
ing  different  levels  of  goals  (primary  and  secondary)  as 
well as "non-judgmental reminders" was important [24]. In 
our study, while the campaign was relatively simple partic-
ipants  tended  to  jointly  invent  their  own  secondary  goals. 
For example, two of the teams in the department had intro-
duced  additional  internal  competitions.  One  team  captain 
awarded the weekly prize for winning the internal challenge 
(chocolates).  Another  team  captain  gave  a  chocolate  a  day 
to  every  team-member  who  reached  10.000  steps.  These 
internal  competitions  were  very  important  to  the  partici-
pants, sometimes even more so than the general goal of the 
campaign.  The  highly  competitive  nature  of  some  of  these 
internal competitions is evident in the following excerpt. In 
a  follow-up  interview,  Jonas  explains  why  he  was  perhaps 
more active during the campaign: 

Jonas: Well, narh, maybe, I mean this weekend I actu-
ally  biked  a  lot,  I  wanted  to  kill  Gitte  [female  partici-
pant], so I biked more than what I would have.  

(Male participant, interview) 

Participants were well aware of the competitive elements of 
the campaign, both due to the fact that it is clearly a part of 
the  campaign  set-up,  but  also  because  some  of  the  partici-
pants joined the campaign in the previous year and experi-
enced differences in how much people cared about compet-
ing.  The  website  showed  both  the  individual  amount  of 
steps, and that of the team. In the campaigns' first iteration 
all  of  the  participants  signed  up  as  one  big  team,  as  there 
are  no  limits  to  how  many  persons  can  join  a  team.  This 
year the participants separated into four teams largely based 
on shared goals and level of competitiveness.  

Charlotte  and  Emma  two  female  participants,  discuss 
in  a  casual  conversation  in  the  office  how  last  year  it 
was difficult when some people wanted to walk 5.000 
steps  a  day  and  others  wanted  to  walk  15.000  steps 
everyday.  They  agreed  that  it  wasn’t  fun  being  at  the 
bottom of the list [the website] of the entire department 
last  year  so  even  if  you  could  still  compare  across 
teams this year, these separate teams were better.  

(Female participants, observation week 1) 

Matching expectations within the team became important to 
ensuring that all participants had a good experience. These 
new  accountabilities  of  walking  resulted  in  participants 
feeling  motivated  to  walk  an  extra  round  with  the  dog  at 
night,  or  bike  those  extra  kilometers.  The  social  ecology 
model suggests that health promotion efforts should seek to 
enhance the fit between people and their surroundings so as 

153

to  enable  people  to  modify  their  behavior  in  accordance 
with  their  plans  and  preferences  [34:290]  The  relatively 
unstructured  nature  of  the  campaign  provided  participants 
with the ability to control and negotiate counting steps from 
walking and other physical activity. Due to the ability to set 
secondary  goals  and  to  select  teams  that  fit  their  prefer-
ences, participants were able to guide their interactions with 
each  other  and  with  their  environment  by  managing  levels 
of  physical  mobility  as  they  relied  on  the  step-counters  to 
provide the necessary feedback.    

Yet  persistence  of  greater  physical  mobility  after  the  cam-
paign  was  not  assured.  Both  during  observations  and  in 
follow-up  interviews  participants  remained  positive  about 
having to walk more precisely because this was a temporary 
requirement,  since  the  campaign  duration  was  just  three 
weeks. For example, Rachel, who had been very active dur-
ing the campaign explained in the follow-up interview: 

Rachel:  Yesterday  we  were  all  laughing  saying  how 
nice  it  is  we’re  not  counting  steps  [anymore],  so  now 
we can’t be bothered going to the canteen to get coffee, 
now  we  just  walk  to  the  café.  I  mean  we  walked  be-
cause  we  were  a  part  of  the  campaign,  and  it  doesn’t 
have  a  health  benefit  if  you’re  not  wearing  the  step 
counter. We laughed at that. 

(Female participant, interview) 

Rachel,  of  course,  was  being  ironic  when  she  equated  the 
step-counter rather than the actual walking with health. Yet 
this  sentiment  is  less  far-fetched  than  it  might  seem.  A 
number of recent studies of various positive behaviors have 
demonstrated their association with less healthful practices. 
For  example,  people  who  bring  their  own  bags  to  the  gro-
cery store rather than using the paper or plastic bags availa-
ble  at  the  store  also  tend  to  buy  more  junk  food  [15].  The 
count-steps campaign did create new, and for the time peri-
od of three weeks, largely positive accountabilities, encour-
aging  greater  mobility  in  a  largely  sedentary  environment, 
but it also resulted in participants feeling entitled to choco-
lates and cakes as part of the campaign.  

By making the number of steps visible participants became 
accountable  towards  their  colleagues  in  ways,  which 
reached out beyond the work sphere. Such accountabilities 
are  not  always  a  clear  positive  benefit  as  they  might 
impinge  on  feelings  of  privacy  and  create  uncomfortable 
amounts  of  social  presure  [25].  This  could  be  one  motiva-
tion for non-participants to refrain from making a commit-
ment  of  participate  in  the  campaign.  As  it  turned  out, 
though,  non-participants  had  a  range  of  reasons  for  not 
choosing to participate, but apprehensions of accountability 
towards colleagues, while present were not a main concern.  

Step counting as social currency 
The  step  counting  was  a  huge  subject  of  conversation 
amongst participants, and the three weeks of the campaign 
did  not  go  unnoticed  by  non-participants.  Often,  partici-
pants would get so caught up in checking the status on the 

154

SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

website,  or  in  other  behaviors  such  as  walking  to  a  coffee 
machine further away, walking to lunch in the furthest cor-
ner  of  the  building,  and  even  booking  meeting  rooms  far 
away,  that  they  did  not  notice  how  their  non-participating 
colleagues  were  affected  by  this,  or  how  they  could  not 
easily join the conversation.  

Eleven of the twenty-eight employees in the department did 
not participate in the campaign, most commonly for admin-
istrative reasons. Interns, external consultants and part time 
employees  were  not  allowed  to  join  the  campaign  since 
they  were  not  enrolled  in  the  company  sports  association. 
For example, Christina expressed on several occasions that 
she would have really liked to join the campaign, and that it 
would  perhaps  have  helped  her  to  have  more  to  talk  about 
with  her  colleagues.  However,  given  the  campaign  set  up, 
she felt excluded, and “couldn’t contribute or participate in 
that  conversation.”  When  asked  about  how  this  resembled 
other projects in a company, where perhaps inability to par-
ticipate in every conversation is natural, she replied 

Christina:  No,  to  me  this  was  different  because  it  has 
this social aspect, like, I don’t feel outside like that, if 
someone’s sitting there talking about, how far are you 
on that project, or did you get around to correcting this 
or  that,  what’s  the  status,  because  it’s  a  natural  thing 
that  that  happens  with  projects,  where  this  was  like 
something that was accessible for almost everyone and 
therefore it was, it was a deselect, where in my case I 
just wasn’t allowed. So there was a clear difference. 

(Female non-participant, interview) 

Diana,  a  part-time,  project-based,  employee  bought  a  step 
counter to try to create “her own campaign”, as she put it. 
But since the score on the website was so important to par-
ticipants,  and  Diana  was  not  on  a  team,  we  observed  how 
she  was  essentially  sidelined  when  conversations  of  step 
counting  got  going  in  the  open  office  space.  In  this  sense, 
participation was not really about technology use per se, but 
about  the  social  team-based  nature  of  interaction  and  the 
administrative hurdles of full time status and membership in 
the  company  sports  association.  Going  back  to  the  social 
ecology model we note that the active elements of owning a 
step-counting  device  and  wanting  to  participate  must  be 
accompanied by the passive elements of enabling adminis-
trative infrastructures for the health promotion campaign to 
be effective more broadly. 

Some employees of course chose not to participate for prac-
tical  reasons,  for  example,  one  non-participant  came  back 
from paternity leave one day in to the campaign, and anoth-
er felt that the hassle of getting a step-counter, and figuring 
it  all  out,  would  be  too  much.  However,  neither  ruled  out 
participating  next  time  the  campaign  runs.  Very  few  em-
ployees  expressed  direct  resistance  towards  to  campaign. 
For example, in the beginning of the campaign (week 1) we 
observed  Betina  (non-participant)  being  asked  by  Jakob 
(participant) why she wasn’t joining in:  

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

“And  you  even  bike  and  run  and  stuff,”  Jakob  added, 
indicating  that  participation  would  not  be  difficult  for 
her. To this Betina replied: “Yes, but then you have to 
register stuff and all kinds of things. The others have so 
far spent a couple of hours running around and setting 
up  teams,”  making  it  clear  she  felt  they  were  wasting 
time during their work by doing this. Jakob replied: “I 
haven’t  spent  that  much  time,”  and  they  left  the  con-
versation at that.  

The  situation  was  clearly  somewhat  uncomfortable,  as 
Betina  was  openly  criticizing  the  amount  of  time  spent  on 
setting up the campaign by her coworkers, and the fact that 
participants would spend time during their workday to reg-
ister  steps  and  discuss  these  with  each  other.  In  general, 
however,  direct  resistance  and  criticism  of  the  campaign 
were  not  as  outspoken  as  in  the  example  above.  Non-
participants would, mainly, air their concerns or annoyance 
in  casual  conversations  with  the  observing  author,  or  in 
follow-up interviews. Therefore, participants had little reac-
tion to non-participations’ concerns, as they mostly did not 
encounter  them.  Although  the  tensions  were  present  the 
limited time of the campaign ensured that few were voiced. 

Studies  of  non-use  suggest  that  choosing  not  to  use  tech-
nology can be a way to keep control over ones life [31,33]. 
For  example,  Kirsten,  a  female  non-participant,  mentioned 
several  times  during  the  campaign  how  one  of  her  friends 
had become obsessed with using a step-counter, ruining her 
quality of life in the process because everything eventually 
revolved around steps. Kirsten therefore felt more in control 
by  not  using  the  step  counter, avoiding the potential threat 
of  overuse.  Frederik  expressed  a  different  form  of  active 
resistance in a follow-up interview:  

I  measure  more  by  a  feeling  in  my  body,  and  when  I 
look at myself in the mirror, and whether it is starting 
to  bulge  in  the  wrong  places  or  whether  I  loose  my 
breath when I go for a walk or something like that. And 
plus,  I  know  that  in  order  to  keep  my  body  well  and 
healthy, then I need to eat reasonably and exercise, and 
I actually don’t need to count steps to figure that out. 

(Frederik, male non-participant, interview) 

This difference between the forms of accounting forced by 
the design of the technology and the valued “feeling in my 
body,” ties to the notion of disenchantment where the non-
user feels nostalgic about the practices that are pushed aside 
by  new  technologies  [31].  It  is  worth  noting  that  non-use 
linked  to  active  resistance,  and  disenchantment,  does  not 
mean  resisting  all  health  initiatives  or  health  technologies. 
In  fact,  non-participants  as  well  as  participants  were  often 
eager  users  of  other  health  promotion  initiatives,  such  as 
"We Bike to Work" campaign, where participants registered 
distance biked. Just because one type of accounting did not 
fit the needs and goals of some of the employees, other sim-
ilar forms of accounting of physical activity clearly could.  

Regardless  of  the  reasons  non-participants  were  clearly 
affected by the campaign. They experienced exclusion dur-
ing  the  social  moments  of  coffee  break  or  lunch  where 
many of their usual conversants were suddenly out of reach, 
concerned  as  they  were  with  discussing  how  they  might 
manage 10.000 steps or which activities result in most out-
rageous  conversion  rates.  Some  expressed  frustration  or 
mild  disapproval  about  this,  others  considered  joining  the 
campaign  next  time  just  so  that  they  could  avoid  the  dis-
comfort. Yet participants were largely unaware of this. One 
participant,  Ida  insisted  on  showing  us  how  another  de-
partment had implemented a public screen listing all partic-
ipant  steps  and  comparisons  with  all  competitors  in  their 
department.  Everyone  passing  through  this  busy  depart-
ment,  whether  participants  or  non-participants,  could  see 
how  well  individuals  and  teams  were  doing.  To  Ida,  the 
absence of such a public screen in her own workspace was 
an  indication  that  her  department  was  quite  relaxed  about 
the  campaign  –  a  sentiment  not  shared  by  the  non-
participants.  

As  participants  and  non-participants  negotiated  the  goal  of 
10.000 steps per day socially, they all at times had to make 
moral choices. Consider the following observation:  

End  of  week  2  of  the  campaign:  Charlotte,  a  female 
participant,  asks  Frederik,  a  male  non-participant, 
whether he wants to join her in getting coffee from the 
near-by  coffee  machine.  Frederik  questions  this,  say-
ing;  “That  coffee  machine?  What  about  your  steps?” 
Charlotte  looks  at  him  and  does  not  reply,  but  just  re-
peats her question, whether he wants to join her or not, 
making it obvious that she does not want to talk about 
step-counting at this point. 

As  this  participant  attempted  to  engage  a  non-participant 
co-worker, she had to negotiate in the moral accounting for 
her  steps  with  someone  who  did  not  participate  and  yet 
could still hold her to account. Towards the end of the cam-
paign many participants fatigued from the pressure of hav-
ing  to  make  their  steps,  and  some  commented  on  how  re-
lieved  they  were  that  the  campaign  was  "just  three  weeks 
long". Non-participants often expressed a similar sentiment 
indicating that the social upheaval wrought by the commit-
ment to counting steps was quite significant.  

A social ecology approach to health in the workplace 
The  follow-up  interviews  and  post  campaign  observations 
made  it  clear  that  participants  were  relieved  to  leave  their 
step counters at home, and to be able to resume their normal 
daily office and activity practices.  

Elizabeth:  (Would)  have  suited  me  fine  if  it  was  just 
two  weeks.  A  bit  of  the  motivation  disappeared.  And 
then it just turns in to a kind of control of you, some-
times  you  just  want  to  be  lazy,  but  you  had  to  get  to 
those 10.000, right? 

(Female participant, interview) 

155

Upon completion of the campaign the team who had sched-
uled  to  get  coffee  every  morning  in  the  other  end  of  the 
building  stopped  doing  that,  and  everyone  went  back  to 
eating lunch in the nearby cafeteria. The heightened activity 
level that was kept up during the campaign ended, and from 
what  we  could  observe  after  the  campaign,  employees  no 
longer  used  their  pedometers  at  work.  But  does  this  mean 
that the campaign failed? 

Generally,  participants  went  back  to  their  prior  habits, 
stopped using their step counters or went back to using oth-
er  types  of  fitness  trackers  they  had  utilized  prior  to  the 
campaign. Given this, perhaps, the campaign can be seen as 
a failure, as the technology did not ‘stick’ and the prior ac-
tivity levels did not translate into new and healthier habits. 
Yet  there  are  other  factors  that  must  be  considered.  This 
particular workplace has a variety of health promotion initi-
atives  offered  to  the  employees.  In  the  framework  of  the 
social ecological model, this is a way of including both ac-
tive and passive elements. Passive elements in this particu-
lar  case  included  a  focus  on  healthy  food  in  the  canteen, 
with  no  juice  or  sodas  available  for  lunch,  a  restriction  on 
cake  (only  served  on  Thursdays),  fruits  available  through-
out  the  day,  and  every  employee  having height  adjustable 
tables to support ergonomic posture and the choice for sit-
ting or standing. Active elements included an in-house gym 
with several types of classes offered, with the option to use 
the  gym  with  pay  for  a  limited  number  of  hours  annually. 
Many  health  promotion  campaigns  were  frequently  on  of-
fer, such as The Sugar Sheriff (focused on leaving out sugar 
from  the  diet)3,  We  Bike  to  Work4  or  the  Tæl  Skridt  cam-
paign. Thus  just  because  some  employees  did  not  partici-
pate in step counting did not mean they were slouches.  

In this way employees were able to participate in activities 
that were to their liking, and fit their own goals, needs and 
personal  preferences,  while  balancing  environmental  fac-
tors, such as transport or family. For example, Kirsten, who 
was quite skeptical of the step counting campaign, had pre-
viously  participated  in  an  initiative  where  employees  were 
offered  to  bring  home  food  leftovers  from  the  canteen, 
seeking  to  diversify  the  vitamins  and  nutrition  employees 
received. She had really enjoyed it saying that it was help-
ful to bring home food, so she did not have to cook after a 
long days work, and that it had probably been more diverse 
and healthy than what she usually cooks. 

Vibeke, a female participant, had a goal to go on a summer 
hike with a friend, and felt she needed to get fit for that trip. 
The Tæl Skridt campaign gave her the opportunity to work 
in more steps during the average day, and she enjoyed that 
this  was  something  she  could  then  talk  about  with  col-
leagues.  Jonas  enjoyed  the  competitive  nature  of  the  Tæl 
Skridt campaign but also kept his eye on other campaigns:  

3http://sukkersheriffen.dk/produkter/zukkerfri-zone-21-dages-kampagne/  
4 http://www.vcta.dk/   

156

SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

Jonas: I think I biked a lot because I’ve signed up for a 
bike event, Sjælsø rundt, and then we have this “Bike to 
work” thing in April, and it’s important to get into shape 
for that. 

(Male participant, interview)  

Frederik, a non-participant, was skeptical of what he saw as 
a  narrow  focus  of  the  Tæl  Skridt  campaign,  but  was  ada-
mant about limiting sitting work, and preferred standing up 
at  his  desk,  which  he  did  almost  all  day.  To  him,  standing 
up was the important factor in keeping healthy, not walking 
and counting so many steps per day.  

From  a  social  ecological  perspective,  the  step  counting 
campaign  can  be  viewed  as  just  one  part  of  improving 
health  in  this  workplace,  an  active  part  of  the  intervention 
to have healthier employees. Step counters could be seen as 
purely  tackling  individual  health  behavior  as  it  requires 
“voluntary  and  sustained  effort  by  target  individuals” 
[34:287]. Where the step counting campaign could be inter-
preted as less than a complete success by itself, it was nev-
ertheless  an  important  part  of  the  active/passive  combina-
tion of interventions, recommended by the social ecological 
approach;  just  one  part  of  an  ongoing  drive  to  improve 
health in a workplace that clearly communicates to the em-
ployees  the  importance  of  their  health  through  policy  sup-
port and financial investment. Non-participation then might 
not  be  a  failure,  but  simply  a  sign  of  some  employees 
choosing  other  active  or  passive  elements,  which  suit  their 
personal health views and environmental factors. So has the 
Tæl  Skridt  campaign  failed  in  instituting  lasting  behavior 
change? Perhaps in the traditional sense this is the case, but 
in  the  context  of  exposure  to  new  technologies,  and  facili-
tating different forms of sociability in the workplace tied to 
physical exercise, it could be counted as a success.  

DISCUSSION 
The use of technology as part of health promotion efforts is 
a  laudable  goal  and  our  study  shows  that  even  narrowly 
focused  and  short-lived  health-promotion  campaigns  can 
get people really excited about participation at least for the 
period  of  the  campaign.  Beyond  this,  our  study  highlights 
three specific points for discussion. First, we demonstrated 
that a step is not a clear and obvious quantity, but a socially 
negotiated one. Second, despite the individual nature of the 
technology and the emphasis on taking charge of your own 
steps,  counting  steps  becomes  a  social  endeavor  often 
tinged with forms of moral accounting. Third, in the work-
place under study employees were able to choose to partici-
pate  in  many  different  initiatives,  while  at  the  same  time 
being  targeted  through  passive  health  promotion  elements 
(such  as  healthy  food  in  the  canteen,  height  adjustable  ta-
bles  or  cake  restrictions).  Thus  at  least  in  this  case,  cam-
paigns  such  as  Tæl  Skridt  clearly  do  not  operate  in 
a vacuum  but  exist  as  part  of  an  ecology  of  workplace 
health practices. Despite the campaign popularity, our data 
bear  no  evidence  of  healthier  practices  continuing  beyond 
the  three  weeks  of  the  campaign.  Yet  it  is  hard  to  say  that 

                                                             
CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

the campaign failed in its goals. We discuss alternate ways 
to conceptualize the notion of success in this context.  

Steps and walking have social meaning 
No matter how simple a technology, the meaning of its out-
put becomes socially constructed and the use of it, through 
persistent  quantification  of  mundane  activity  can  come  to 
be felt as stressful and limiting [6]. The time spent on nego-
tiating  steps  was  a  point  of  annoyance  to  some  non-
participants, as they felt it intruded on time spent on work. 
The  figuring  of  the  meaning  of  steps,  the  calculation  of 
conversions,  the  chocolates  and  campaign  site  entries  all 
amounted  to  what  Miller  et  al.  had  termed  “hidden  work” 
[23].  As  walking  and  steps  did  not  constitute  the  primary 
work tasks of the participants, these likely couldn’t be sus-
tained for long especially since these had an effect on non-
participants  as  well.  Temporary  inconvenience  brought 
about by a technology that can be used as a stepping stone 
to new skills and habits is not a big issue [26], but there are 
two important points that this negotiation around the mean-
ing of a step brings up. First, if the goal is to address seden-
tary behavior in the workplace, then designing technologies 
or interventions that interfere with the time spent on actual 
work is unlikely to be popular with employees or employers 
for  long.  To  be  serious  about  supporting  health-behavior 
change  through  technologies  in  the  workplace  then  is  to 
acknowledge and to design for the hidden work and time it 
will  take  to  participate.  Second,  and  perhaps  more  im-
portantly, if the very meaning of a step is not an inherently 
known quantity, but a notion that is socially constructed in 
part due to technical limitations of step-counting devices, it 
is important to account for the potential variability in what a 
step might be in the course of technology design. The step 
counter  is  often  seen  as  an  incredibly  simple  technology 
and it is too easy and tempting to overlook how steps might 
not be an inherently known quantity. Thus instead of intro-
ducing  the  step-counter  as  a  technology  that  is  so  simple 
users will hardly notice it, it may be more useful to explicit-
ly encourage users to take the time to get to know their de-
vices  and  to  discuss  the  meaning  and  the  technical  imple-
mentation of measuring steps.  

Furthermore, the findings presented here highlight the stress 
of  competition  for  steps,  which  was  not  welcome  past  the 
relatively short duration of the campaign. This suggests that 
gamification  and  persistent  long-term  quantification  of  ac-
tivity at work more generally and activities related to health 
specifically  may  become  detrimental  to  themselves  in  the 
long term even when producing active improvements in the 
short-term.  Perhaps  it  may  be  instructive  to  change  the 
game often and sometimes stop counting.  

The social costs of moral accounting 
No matter how individually focused the technology design 
might  be,  the  performance  of  step  counting  is  distinctly 
social  and  can  manifest  in  unexpected  forms  of  moral  ac-
counting. In our study few constraints were in place to en-
sure  that  participants  truthfully  reported  their  step  counts. 

Yet  many  worried  about  their  technologies  potentially  un-
fairly inflating the evidence of their walking efforts. Moral 
accounting  [14]  is  based  on  the  notion  of  wealth,  relating 
moral action to increases in personal well-being. Thus mak-
ing more steps would lead to increase in personal well be-
ing if it is conducted fairly, without taking undue advantage 
of  or  impinging  on  the  needs  of  others  too  much.  The  no-
tion of moral accounting is useful as it forces us to think in 
terms  of  social  dependencies  and  accountabilities  beyond 
the  oversimplification  of  social  networks  and  interpersonal 
privacy concerns. With deployments of health technologies 
in  workplaces,  the  kind  of  accounting  individuals  might 
need  to  do  involves  not  only  their  personal  step  goals,  but 
also  the  social  relationships  and  social  dependencies  they 
must maintain despite these.  

If we are to take seriously that decision making around the 
use  of  step-counters  can  become  a  form  of  moral  account-
ing  then  it  is  important  to  consider  both  users  as  well  as 
non-users  of  the  technologies,  user  obligations  outside  the 
individual health goals and the environments within which 
they  operate.  The  enforced  sharing  of  progress  for  all  par-
ticipants,  visible  to  all  other  participants  surely  resulted  in 
efforts to improve personal performance but it also lead to 
ensuring that the reporting of steps, while still occasionally 
nudged or rounded up, remained at least visibly fair. Partic-
ipants worked to renegotiate their own moral accountabili-
ties  by  creating  different  teams  and  thus  trying  to  manage 
expectations. As part of this effort, participants also created 
their  own  secondary  goals  although  this  was  not  directly 
supported by the campaign [24].  

Future health technologies might take this into account and 
support  the  creation  of  preferred  goal  settings  by  the  user, 
acknowledging  that  chocolates  or  other  less  healthy  treats 
might become a part of what it means to be healthy. Work-
ing  seriously  with  the  concept  of  moral  accounting,  how 
might  we  create  tools,  that  harvest  the  benefits  of  creating 
accountabilities,  but  respect  the  delicate  work  and  private 
life balance that is at times breached in initiatives, that put 
particular behaviors as the ultimate goal, making all means 
fair  game?  After  all,  while  moral  well-being  can  be  accu-
mulated,  it  is  not  something  that  comes  exclusively  from 
individual  action  but  depends  also  on  the  "good  actions  of 
other  people"  [14:54].  Moral  accounting  then  offers  a  way 
to  tie  together  the  more  technologically  and  individually 
focused  approaches  favored  by  HCI  and  CSCW  with  the 
more  holistic  approaches  proposed  in  social  ecology  and 
health promotion [21,34]. 

Designing for a social ecology of health 
In  research  on  health  behavior  change  and  in  the  body  of 
work on health promotion what constitutes success has been 
difficult  to  define  and  to  measure  [17,40].  Whether  health 
promotion campaigns are a success or failure in traditional 
behavior-change  terms  of  influencing  changes  in  habitual 
behavior  remains  an  open  question.  Yet  the  notion  of  suc-
cess  and  the  question  of  ‘did  it  work’  are  not  trivial  and 

157

SESSION: TOWARDS PHYSICAL AND SOCIAL WELLNESS

tivation in the second group as merely an individual short-
coming that can be overcome through nudges, incentives or 
threats.  Rather,  it  is  important  to  understand  the  broader 
context of available resources and constraints that may have 
an impact on motivation and healthy behaviors.  

The Tæl Skridt campaign is successful as a form of health 
promotion, rather than as a behavior change effort, for two 
reasons.  First  the  campaign  is  designed  broadly  enough  to 
allow participants significant control over the form of their 
eventual participation. Second, its success stems not from a 
single  or  bi-annual  three-week  deployment,  but  from  the 
fact  that  it  is  a  part  of  broader  effort  to  promote  overall 
health  supported  by  state  and  commercial  actors.  From  a 
health promotion point of view, the goal is to keep notions 
of health and examples of easily achieved healthy physical 
activity  salient,  rather  than  insisting  on  repetitive  perfor-
mance  of  one  particular  behavior.  Whether  it  is  cycling  to 
work, eating less cake or walking 10.000 steps, the idea is 
to foster a general healthier outlook and not the accumula-
tion of quantitative evidence of walking.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We are indebted to all of our respondents for their generous 
participation.  We  thank  Christian  Østergaard  Madsen  for 
his  support  of  our  project  and  anonymous  reviewers  for 
their extensive and constructive feedback.   

REFERENCES 
1.  Aino Ahtinen, Pertti Huuskonen, and Jonna Häkkilä. 
2010. Let’s all get up and walk to the North Pole. 
NordiCHI ’10. 

2.  Eric Baumer, Sherri Katz, Jill Freeman, et al. 2012. 
Prescriptive persuasion and open-ended social 
awareness: Expanding the design space of mobile 
health. CSCW ’12. 

3.  Dena Bravata, Crystal Smith-Spangler, Vandana 

Sundaram, et al. 2007. Using pedometers to increase 
physical activity and improve health: a systematic 
review. JAMA 298, 19, 2296–2304. 

4.  Lorraine Buis, Timothy Poulton, Robert Holleman, et 

al. 2009. Evaluating Active U: an Internet-mediated 
physical activity program. BMC public health 9, 331. 

5.  Catherine Chan, Daniel Ryan, and Catrine Tudor-
locke. 2004. Health benefits of a pedometer-based 
physical activity intervention in sedentary workers. 
Preventive Medicine 39, 1215–1222. 

6.  Mads Christophersen, Tue Langhoff, and Pernille 
Bjørn. 2015. Unforeseen Challenges: Adopting 
Wearable Health Data Tracking Devices to Reduce 
Health Insurance Costs in Organizations. UAHCI ’15. 

7.  Sunny Consolvo, Katherine Everitt, Ian Smith, and 
James Landay. 2006. Design requirements for 
technologies that encourage physical activity. CHI ’06. 

8.  Sunny Consolvo, Predrag Klasnja, David McDonald, 
and James Landay. 2014. Designing for Healthy 
Lifestyles: Design Considerations for Mobile 

should  not  be  dismissed.  As  the  Tæl  Skridt  campaign  re-
peats twice per year it is possible that after several iterations 
behavior  change  does  in  fact  occur.  The  short  run  of  each 
campaign cycle may allow people to continue getting excit-
ed  and  not  too  tired  of  it.  In  order  to  assess  the  benefit  of 
campaign  participation,  however,  it  is  important  to  look 
beyond the questions of success or failure of one campaign. 
Individual health interventions such as the Tæl Skridt cam-
paign do not operate in a vacuum and thus do not need to be 
overwhelmingly  successful  to  raise  the  overall  level  of  ac-
tivity  among  employees.  The  social  ecological  approach 
suggests that in designing interventions for behavior change 
it  is  important  to  think  in  terms  of  suites  of  efforts  rather 
than single technologies or individualized approaches.  

levels)  and  with  which 

CSCW/HCI  researchers  have  already  begun  discussions  of 
where and how might we set in to improve health (individ-
ual/environmental 
tools  (ac-
tive/passive) [21,32]. A social ecological approach can pro-
vide a common starting ground by emphasizing the need to 
bring in both active and passive tools, and to target individ-
ual,  group  and  perhaps  environmental  levels  at  the  same 
time  [34].  We  have  argued  in  this  article  that  participants, 
and  non-participants,  already  experience  health  promotion 
initiatives as one element of many that targets not only in-
dividual  behavior  but  also  the  social  context  of  the  work-
place. What would it mean for research to stop debating the 
classic individual/environment gap, but to realize that these 
are inherently connected, and that initiatives should be built 
to reflect this? 

HEALTH PROMOTION OR BEHAVIOR CHANGE? 
Following Maitland [21] in this article we have focused on 
the Tæl Skridt campaign as an example of a health promo-
tion  rather  than  a  behavior  change  effort.  This  is  a  signifi-
cant shift in focus, enabled by the use of the social ecology 
lens  [34].  Unlike  behavior  change,  health  promotion  takes 
its departure from healthy behavior as a baseline to be sup-
ported and encouraged rather than addressing sickness and 
unhealthy  behavior  as  something  to  be  changed  [21,36]. 
That is, health promotion focuses more on leveraging exist-
ing  resources  and  addressing  the  broader  context  of  health 
behavior practices, rather than driving toward eliciting con-
sistency  in  behaviors  oriented  towards  one  specific  goal, 
such  as  walking  more.  This  means  that  health  promotion 
efforts by definition must offer more flexibility and control 
to individuals because they recognize the diversity of envi-
ronmental constraints that people encounter.  

Single  point  of  feedback  technologies  such  as  activity 
trackers  offer  obvious  solutions  for  those  who  have  their 
own motivation and health goals and may only require easy 
to  understand  feedback  that  supports  their  own  efforts  to-
wards healthier behaviors. Alternatively, those that may be 
curious about potentially engaging in healthier practices but 
lack the motivation to do so are less likely to continue use 
beyond the novelty effect. From a health promotion point of 
view it would be a mistake to conceptualize the lack of mo-

158

CSCW '16, FEBRUARY 27–MARCH2, 2016, SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA

Technologies to Encourage Consumer Health and 
Wellness. Human-Computer Interaction ’14. 

9.  Robert Emerson, Rachel Fretz, and Lina Shaw. 2011. 
Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes. The University of 
Chicago Press. 

10.  Daniel Epstein, Alan Borning, and James Fogarty. 

2013. Fine-grained sharing of sensed physical activity: 
a value sensitive approach. UbiComp’13, 489–498. 

11.  Dorte Eriksen, Susanne Rosthøj, Hermann Burr, and 

Andreas Holtermann. 2015. Sedentary work-
Associations between five-year changes in 
occupational sitting time and body mass index. 
Preventive Medicine 73, 1–5. 

12.  Sara Eriksén. 2002. Designing for accountability. 

NordiCHI ’02. 

13.  Thomas Fritz, Elaine Huang, Gail Murphy, and 

Thomas Zimmermann. 2014. Persuasive Technology in 
the Real World: A Study of Long-Term Use of Activity 
Sensing Devices for Fitness. CHI ’14. 

25.  Sean Munson, Erin Krupka, Caroline Richardson, and 

Paul Resnick. 2015. Effects of Public Commitments 
and Accountability in a Technology-Supported 
Physical Activity Intervention. CHI ’15. 

26.  Sean Munson. 2012. Pervasive, Persuasive Health: 
Some Challenges. Pervasive computing, IEEE. 
27.  Derek Neil, Samuel Perrault, Nathan Lapierre, Derek 

Reilly, David Parker and Harjot Bal. 2013. Limber: 
exploring motivation in a workplace exergame. CSCW 
’13. 

28.  Kevin Patrick, Fred Raab, Marc Adams, et al. 2009. A 
text message-based intervention for weight loss: 
randomized controlled trial. Journal of medical 
Internet research 11, 1, e1. 

29.  Vijay Rajanna, Dev Jyoti Behera, Daniel Goldberg, 

and Tracy Hammond. 2014. Step Up Life: A Context 
Aware Health Assistant. HealthGIS’14, 21–30. 
30.  John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, and Matthew Chalmers. 
2014. Personal tracking as lived informatics. CHI ’14. 

14.  Mark Johnson. 1988. How Moral Psychology Changes 

31.  Christine Satchell and Paul Dourish. 2009. Beyond The 

Moral Theory. In Mind and Morals: Essays on 
Cognitive Science and Ethics, Larry May, Marilyn 
Friedman and Andy Clark (eds.). MIT Press. 

15.  Uma Karmarkar and Bryan Bollinger. 2014. BYOB: 
How Bringing your Own Shopping Bags Leads to 
Treating Yourself, and the Environment. Havard 
Business School. Working Paper. 

16.  Ashraf Khalil and Salam Abdallah. 2013. Harnessing 
social dynamics through persuasive technology to 
promote healthier lifestyle. Computers in Human 
Behavior 29, 6, 2674–2681. 

17.  Predrag Klasnja, Sunny Consolvo, and Wanda Pratt. 

2011. How to evaluate technologies for health behavior 
change in HCI research. CHI ’11. 

18.  Min Kyung Lee, Sara Kiesler, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2011. 
Mining behavioral economics to design persuasive 
technology for healthy choices. CHI ’11. 

19.  James Lin, Lena Mamykina, Silvia Lindtner, Gregory 
Delajoux, and Henry Strub. 2006. Fish’n’Steps: 
Encouraging Physical Activity with an Interactive 
Computer Game. UbiComp ’06. 

20.  Julie Maitland and Matthew Chalmers. 2011. 
Designing for Peer Involvement in Weight 
Management. CHI ’11. 

21.  Julie Maitland. 2011. Towards negotiation as a 

framework for health promoting technology. ACM 
SIGHIT Record 1, 1, 10. 

22.  Andrew Miller and Elizabeth Mynatt. 2014. 

StepStream: A School-based Pervasive Social Fitness 
System for Everyday Adolescent Health. CHI ’14. 
23.  Andrew Miller, Erika Poole, Yan Xu, et al. 2012. The 

work of play. CSCW ’12. 

24.  Sean Munson and Sunny Consolvo. 2012. Exploring 

Goal-setting, Rewards, Self-Monitoring, and Sharing to 
Motivate Physical Activity. Pervasive computing, 
IEEE. 

User: Use And Non-Use in HCI. OzCHI ’09. 
32.  32.  M.C. Schraefel and Elizabeth Churchill. 2014. 

Wellth Creation: Using Computer Science to Support 
Proactive Health. IEEE Computer Society, 18–20. 

33.  33.  Neil Selwyn. 2003. Apart from technology: 

Understanding people’s non-use of information and 
communication technologies in everyday life. 
Technology in Society 25, 1, 99–116. 

34.  Daniel Stokols. 1996. Translating social ecological 

theory into guidelines for community health promotion. 
American Journal of Health Promotion 10, 282–298. 
35.  Helena Tobiasson and Yngve Sundblad. 2014. Still at 
the Office - Designing for Physical Movement- 
Inclusion During Office Work. IHC proceedings. 

36.  Keith Tones and Jackie Green. 2004. Health 
Promotion: Planning and Strategies. SAGE. 

37.  Emily Troshynski, Charlotte Lee, and Paul Dourish. 
2008. Accountabilities of Presence: Reframing 
Location-Based Systems. CHI ’08. 

38.  Catrine Tudor-Locke and David Bassett. 2004. How 
many steps/day are enough? Preliminary pedometer 
indicies for public health. Sports Medicine 34, 1, 1–8. 
39.  Dhaval Vyas, Zachary Fitz-Walter, and Erica Mealy. 
2015. Exploring Physical Activities in an Employer-
Sponsored Health Program. CHI ’15. 

40.  David White. 2001. Evaluating evidence and making 

judgements of study quality: Loss of evidence and risks 
to policy and practice decisions. Critical Public Health 
11, 1. 

41.  Donna Zulman, Laura Damschroder, Ryan Smith, et al. 

2013. Implementation and evaluation of an 
incentivized Internet-mediated walking program for 
obese adults. Translational Behavioral Medicine 3, 4, 
357–369.  

159

