Sundroid: Solar Radiation Awareness with Smartphones∗

Thomas Fahrni, Michael Kuhn, Philipp Sommer, Roger Wattenhofer, and Samuel Welten
Computer Engineering and Networks Laboratory
ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ﬁrstname.lastname@tik.ee.ethz.ch

ABSTRACT
While the sun is important for our health, overexposure to
sunlight carries signiﬁcant health risks ranging from sunburn
to skin cancer. Although people know about these risks,
sunlight related skin damages have increased over the past
decades. We have conducted a survey that sheds light on
this phenomenon and suggests that the missing natural sense
for UV radiation negatively inﬂuences people’s sun related
behavior. To address this issue, we have implemented Sun-
droid. Sundroid measures the incident UV radiation using a
body-worn sensing unit that communicates wirelessly with
the user’s smartphone. The phone thereby acts as a user in-
terface to present the measured data in an intuitive manner,
and to notify the user once a critical amount of sunlight has
been reached. Sundroid can also be applied in other con-
texts, such as behavioral research or medicine. We show
that after calibration, errors are within 5% compared to a
high-precision reference signal.

Author Keywords
Personal Health Monitoring, Wearable Sensor, Solar Radia-
tion, UV Exposure, Dosimetry, Survey

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
J.3 Life and Medical Sciences: Health.

General Terms
Design, Experimentation, Measurement, Reliability

INTRODUCTION
Sunlight is a driving force for life and, amongst others due to
its role in the production of vitamin D, indispensable for our
health. However, over the past decades an increasing num-
ber of studies warned against the risks of excessive sunlight
exposure. A vast majority of people has already experienced
the unpleasant feeling of sunburn after having stayed in the
sun too long. Unfortunately, the harmful effects can go be-
yond unpleasant feelings. Long-term damage, such as pre-
∗

The authors of this paper are alphabetically ordered.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc
permission and/or a fee.
UbiComp’11, September 17–21, 2011, Beijing, China.
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0630-0/11/09...$10.00.

mature skin aging and skin cancer are severe implications
that can result from an overexposure to sunlight, even if no
immediate signs of sunburn are visible [3].

Both, sunburn as well as the mentioned long-term damages
are caused by the ultraviolet (UV) radiation contained in the
sunlight. In fact, most of the non-melanoma skin cancers are
associated with exposure to ultraviolet radiation [29]. A con-
siderable fraction of people is aware of the risks originating
from the sun. Nevertheless, the number of such skin cancer
cases in the United States has constantly increased over the
past years [30]. Even though most people know about appro-
priate protective measures, a large fraction of the population
gets sunburned from time to time. A ﬁrst contribution of this
paper is a survey that sheds light on the reasons for this phe-
nomenon. A relevant ﬁnding of our survey is that inattention
and the inability to correctly assess the UV intensity are two
major reasons for excessive UV exposure and therefore for
people to get sunburned.

Contributions. Following these ﬁndings, the main contribu-
tion of this paper is a wearable prototype system that tracks
the wearer’s sunlight exposure in real-time. This is in con-
trast to existing wearable UV dosimeters, that are designed
for ofﬂine analysis only. The proposed system is designed
in a modular fashion and consists of two parts: (1) A small
sensor unit that measures the UV radiation and is equipped
with a Bluetooth module. (2) A smartphone application that
collects and processes the sensor unit’s measurements. The
phone thereby acts as a generic processing platform, which
makes the system adjustable to a wide range of applications.
The application presents the measured solar radiation data
in a user-friendly manner. Moreover, it is able to notify the
user of the imminent danger due to UV radiation when ap-
propriate, thereby taking into account critical factors such as
the speciﬁc skin type of the user or sunscreen applied.

The modular design of our sensor system reduces the effort
to address other usage scenarios, as basically only the smart-
phone application needs to be modiﬁed.
In fact, we also
envision applications that go beyond personal UV radiation
monitoring. Discussions with a dermatologist have shown
that our system could prove advantageous in several med-
ical settings. Moreover, we see various usage scenarios in
research and large-scale sensing.

For the discussed usage scenarios, it is essential that the
sensor unit works reliably and provides accurate data. We

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China365have thus paid particular attention to the technical sound-
ness of our system. By independently tracking UVA (400 nm
- 315 nm) and UVB (315 nm - 280 nm) radiation, we can
well approximate the action spectrum relevant to a given
application. An example is the erythema action spectrum,
which describes the radiation relevant to sunburn that is ab-
sorbed by the skin. The system has been calibrated using
two six hours traces recorded at the World Radiation Center
in Davos, Switzerland. The comparison with the reference
measurements shows that our sensor module is able to ac-
curately measure the radiation absorbed by the skin at the
position of the sensor. In separate experiments we have in-
vestigated the effect of a diffuser to reduce angle dependen-
cies. Furthermore, we have conducted two pilot studies in
each of which we have recorded real-world data of a person
wearing the system during a speciﬁc outdoor activity.

RELATED WORK
Existing research efforts have investigated various aspects
relevant to our work both in medicine and in the ﬁeld of
ubiquitous computing. In the following, we will brieﬂy re-
view major achievements and results from these different ar-
eas and sketch how our work relates to or was inﬂuenced by
these ﬁndings.

UV Dosimeters. A variety of wearable UV dosimeters based
on different technologies have been proposed in the past. A
rough categorization distinguishes between chemical, bio-
logical, and electronic methods to measure UV radiation [15].
While electronic measurements facilitate the post-processing
of various sensor inputs to approximate a desired action spec-
trum, biological and chemical dosimeters are more restricted
with respect to the spectral response. Biological dosimeters
typically agree well with the DNA damage spectrum [15].
An example of the use of a biological dosimeter is a study
on long-term UV exposure of mountain guides [24].

As opposed to biological and chemical dosimeters that ex-
hibit an integral characteristic, electronic systems based on
photodiodes can measure the UV intensity at a given point
in time. They thus do not only provide higher ﬂexibility
with respect to post-processing, but are also well suited to
creating plots of the UV intensity over time. Examples for
such systems are [1], [6], and [12]. Like our sensor system,
these devices are designed to be worn by humans. However,
all of them measure UV intensity using a single sensor and
thus fail to take advantage of the ﬂexibility given by post-
processing of individual UVA and UVB values. Moreover,
they are primarily designed for the use in medical studies,
and thus do neither provide a direct feedback to the user, nor
do they support real-time monitoring. As a consequence the
intensity data can only be retrieved after a measurement se-
ries has been completed, which is in contrast to our system
that constantly transmits the sensor values to a mobile phone,
and thus can directly take inﬂuence on the user’s behavior.
Beside these limitations, the system described in [12] was
used in a medical study to record the exposure to UV radi-
ation [36] of over 300 subjects. They found that sunburn is
correlated with risk behavior.

Mobile phones. We have chosen the mobile phone as a pro-
cessing platform as it provides high ﬂexibility with respect to
applications. Besides the powerful post-processing possibil-
ities, the advantages of a phone are its communication capa-
bilities that make it a perfect gateway to transmit sensor data
to servers [37], the permanent reachability by the user [27]
and the wide variety of sensors readily available [23]. For
these reasons mobile phones have been said to be an ideal
platform for context-driven reminders and alerts [34, 17],
and for the use in large-scale sensing studies [23, 37].

Reminders. In a recent study, it was shown that the overall
adherence to sunscreen use can be improved by daily text-
message reminders [2]. As overly frequent reminders are
likely to be disturbing over time, in this paper we propose to
take the context into account to only issue reminders when
required. Such context aware reminders have been proposed
before, both, for medical scenarios [22, 20, 35, 28] and in
everyday settings [34, 17, 18, 21, 8, 32, 13]. For everyday
settings, location-based reminders have been examined par-
ticularly well, and have been found useful in several user
studies [21, 17, 34]. These studies underline that people are
interested in and amenable to context-aware reminders. We
thus expect that the context dependent reminders issued by
Sundroid can achieve a similar improvement of sunscreen
adherence as reported by [2] in a much less obtrusive way.

Medical applications. Many of the usage scenarios we en-
vision are related to health related contexts, such as sunburn
warning or long-term behavioral training with respect to sun-
light exposure. A variety of studies proposes remote and
self-monitoring systems in medical contexts and/or investi-
gates their success. Examples include diabetes self-care [10,
20, 35, 26], asthma management [28], context-aware pill re-
minders [22] and generic remote monitoring frameworks [5,
25]. User studies thereby on the one hand show that peo-
ple are open to such systems [28, 35] and on the other hand
indicate a positive effect on the patients’ health and/or com-
fort [26, 22, 28, 10, 20]. Several authors highlight the ad-
vantages of mobile phones and PDAs as a platform and in-
formation hub [20, 10, 35, 28, 26, 25, 5] and the usefulness
of context-driven reminders [20, 22, 26, 28, 35], for example
triggered when the monitoring system detects low activity or
the need to take medication. Moreover, visual feedback of
the monitored data has said to be helpful by different stud-
ies [10, 26], in particular when it comes to train the user’s
awareness of, or behavior in a given context. A design eval-
uation of Logan et al. [20] further investigates relevant re-
quirements as seen by the end users. In particular, they state
that user intervention should be avoided for data-gathering,
messages must be user understandable (i.e. in laymen terms),
and that the system’s user interface needs be intuitive. More-
over, Nachman et al. [26] conclude that a wearable sensor
system should be unobtrusive, contain as few components as
possible, and should not attract attention to the wearer in the
public. When designing the prototype implementation of the
Sundroid system, we have taken these different factors into
account as far as possible given the hardware constraints.

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China366SURVEY
As mentioned in the introduction, the number of skin cancer
cases has constantly increased over the past years and most
of the non-melanoma skin cancers are associated with expo-
sure to ultraviolet radiation [29]. Moreover, a study in New
Zealand showed that 17.8% of the skin cancer cases can di-
rectly be attributed to sunburn [33]. Despite the warnings
of health departments from all around the world, most peo-
ple have already experienced sunburn. In the following we
present an online survey that investigates possible reasons
for the mismatch between information and action, i.e. why
people get burned even though they know about the severe
health risks.

The online survey was conducted amongst 785 students (52%
male, 48% female) from different departments at our univer-
sity. We wanted to know how often people get burned, and
why this happens. For this purpose we have also investigated
how well people are informed about the risks of sunburn
and protective measures. In addition, we wanted to know
whether they believe that a warning system could prevent
some of the sunburns they suffer, and whether they would
be willing to use such a system. We ﬁrst asked four con-
trol questions related to sunburn and its risks. As expected
the participants are generally well informed. Roughly three
quarter answered all questions correctly, and even 95% know
that sunburn increases the risk of skin cancer.1

Despite this knowledge, roughly two thirds of the respon-
dents experience sunburn at least once a year, and almost
everybody (96%) has already been sunburned. For the rest
of this section, the 4% of participants who never suffered
sunburn are excluded. From the remaining participants al-
most all (96%) consider sunburn somewhat (38%) or very
(58%) annoying. To understand why people are suffering
sunburn despite the risks and the potential annoyance, we
further asked for the reasons for getting sunburned. To get
an unbiased picture, the question was formulated openly, i.e.
replies were given in free form text. For evaluation, we man-
ually grouped the answers into semantic categories. A single
answer could have been assigned to more than one category.
The most frequent answers are summarized in Table 1.

It seems that several of the issues mentioned in Table 1, such
as the misjudgment of radiation intensity and staying in the
sun too long, could be overcome if people were warned be-
fore the critical dose of UV radiation has been reached. To
ﬁnd out if people agree with this presumption we asked them
whether they believe that a warning system would reduce the
number of sunburns. More than two thirds of the respon-
dents conﬁrmed this. Those denying could state why such
a warning would not help. People mainly said they knew
when to react themselves, and/or could not take appropriate
measures in the relevant situations anyways.

We further wanted to know what type of sunburn warning
system people might use. The corresponding question was
only given to those participants who previously conﬁrmed

1These numbers might be slightly biased as they reﬂect the answers
of our participants that tend to be well educated people.

Category of answer

1. Misjudgment the solar radiation
2. No sunscreen at hand
3. Staying in the sun for too long
4. Incorrect/insufﬁcient application of

Percentage
23%
19%
18%
13%

sunscreen

5. Forgot to apply sunscreen
6. Did not pay attention
7. Sport activities
8. The skin was not yet accustomed to

the sun (mostly in spring)

9. Did not apply sunscreen (reason un-

known)

10. Sleeping in the sun

13%
10%
10%
8%

8%

6%

Table 1. Most popular reasons for sunburn according to our survey.
A single answer could have been assigned to more than one category.
Therefore percentage numbers do not sum up to 100%.

that a warning system might help. More than half of the
respondents could imagine to use a corresponding smart-
phone application. Roughly a third would feel comfortable
to wear a dedicated sensor device and even more than half
could imagine to use such a device if it was unobtrusively
integrated into accessories or clothing.

The main ﬁndings of our survey can be summarized as fol-
lows:

• A signiﬁcant fraction of the people (67%) suffer a sunburn
regularly (at least once a year), despite their knowledge of
the risks and countermeasures.

• A lot of the reasons for getting sunburned are related to
inattention and misjudgment of the sun’s intensity, and
could be overcome by an adequate warning mechanism.
• Many people are willing to use such a warning system in
form of a smartphone application and/or dedicated sensor
device.

Following these ﬁndings, we propose Sundroid, a prototype
system that is able to warn its user once a critical dose of
sunlight has been absorbed, and can help to improve people’s
awareness of the incident radiation in different situations. It
thereby acts as a replacement for a missing human sense for
UV radiation that could naturally warn us, similarly as our
sense of smell warns us of inappropriate food.

SYSTEM DESIGN
In this section, we describe the design and implementation of
Sundroid, a wearable system to measure solar radiation. The
current prototype system targets a broad range of application
scenarios for solar radiation awareness. Sundroid consists of
two separate components, as shown in Figure 1: A dedicated
sensor unit to measure UV radiation, and a smartphone as a
universal computing platform. To provide data relevant to its
user, the sensor unit needs to be body wearable. Moreover,
to ﬁnd widespread acceptance, it is inevitable to make the
corresponding device as unobtrusive as possible and avail-
able at low cost.

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China367User Interface
on Smartphone

Bluetooth

WiFi/3G

Central Server

Wearable Sensing Unit
with Bluetooth transceiver

Storage

SD
Card

Ofﬂine Analysis

Figure 1. Schematic overview of the Sundroid system: A wearable sensing unit containing UV sensors is attached to a user’s clothes or accessories.
Sensor data is transferred using Bluetooth to a smartphone, which serves as a graphical user interface. Optionally, measurement data can be
transferred to a central server or stored on a SD card for ofﬂine analysis by researchers or medical personnel.

Due to application speciﬁc action spectra, we decided to in-
dependently measure UVA and UVB intensities. This design
provides maximal ﬂexibility for the approximation of differ-
ent spectra. An example is the erythema action spectrum in
case of sunburn, which describes the wavelength dependent
sensitivity of skin relevant to sunburn. Other examples in-
clude the action spectra for DNA damage [31] or skin cancer
[7].

To further improve the ﬂexibility with respect to possible
applications, we rely on the user’s smartphone as a generic
information hub. The phone can on the one hand provide
further context, such as location and activity patterns, and
is on the other hand used for data processing, presentation
and communication. Data exchange between the sensor unit
and the smartphone is realized over a Bluetooth wireless link
in real-time. An important requirement is that the system
continually monitors the solar radiation to which the user is
exposed, even when the user is temporarily not in the prox-
imity of the phone. Depending on the application, the phone
can either log the data and present it to the user, or forward it
to a central infrastructure, e.g., for analysis by experts such
as researchers or medical personnel.

Wearable Sensing Unit
The wearable sensing unit consists of a custom made printed
circuit board (see Figure 2) and a plastic enclosure. It fea-
tures a TI MSP430 low-power microcontroller with 4 KBytes
program ﬂash and 512 Bytes of RAM, which is connected
to a Roving Networks RN-42 low-power Bluetooth module.
All components are standard parts available at low prices
(tens of dollars). The sensing unit is supplied with power by
a 3.7 V lithium-polymer rechargeable battery.

UV Sensors. We equipped the wearable sensing unit with
a UVA photodiode (Genicom GUVA-S10GD) and a UVB
photodiode (Genicom GUVB-S10GD). Each of the two pho-
todiodes gives an estimation of the current sunlight intensity
in their intrinsic spectrum. Depending on the use case we are
interested in different spectra. Some medical applications,
for example, require the measurement of UVA only. In the

Figure 2. The wearable sensing unit consists of a double-sided printed
circuit board. The Bluetooth module and the UV photodiodes are
mounted on the top layer (left), while the microcontroller and the ana-
log circuits are on the bottom layer (right).

context of sunburn, we are interested in the erythema action
spectrum, which can be approximated using a weighted lin-
ear combination of the values of the UVA and UVB sensors.
We found that a combination of 9% UVA estimation and
91% UVB estimation can accurately approximate the ery-
thema action spectrum in our setting, as shown in Figure 3.

0

10

- 2

10

- 4

10

0

10

- 2

10

- 4

10

Erythema Spectrum
UVA Sensor
UVB Sensor

Erythema Spectrum
Approximation

300

320

340

360

380

400

300

320

340

360

380

400

Wavelength [nm]

Wavelength [nm]

Figure 3. Normalized sensor responses for sunlight (left). The ery-
thema action spectrum can be approximated by combining the values
of the UVA and UVB sensors (right).

Data Acquisition and Buffering. Measurement of UV ra-
diation using photodiodes can be accomplished with a sim-
ple analog circuit. The energy of the incoming light within
the active area of the photodiode is converted into a small

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China368 
 
current. The magnitude of this current depends on the in-
tensity of the light and the wavelength dependent sensitivity
of the photodiode with respect to the incoming light’s spec-
trum. Since the resulting currents are very small, we use
a transimpedance ampliﬁer circuit to convert the photocur-
rent into a corresponding voltage, which is continually sam-
pled using the 10-bit analog-digital converter of the micro-
controller. Both sensors can be sampled multiple times per
second. Depending on the availability of a Bluetooth con-
nection to the user’s smartphone, measurement data is either
transferred immediately to the phone or buffered locally in
the memory of the microcontroller. This helps to avoid data
loss when the user temporarily leaves the connection range
of the phone. The storage capacity of the microcontroller
allows to store several minutes of samples at the highest res-
olution using a circular buffer. Furthermore, we also accu-
mulate the sum of the sensor readings which have not yet
been transferred to the phone. This assures that we can track
the total absorbed radiation even if no Bluetooth connection
is available for longer periods. However, we might loose
some of the individual sensor readings since they have been
overwritten in the local buffer with new data.

Power Consumption
Prolonging battery lifetime is a crucial aspect for wearable
applications. Therefore, we carefully designed the sensor
unit for low-power operation. The analog sensor circuit and
the microcontroller can be put into low-power mode most of
the time to reduce the overall power consumption. As a re-
sult, the biggest part of the power budget is assigned to the
Bluetooth module. By duty-cycling the Bluetooth module
when connected (sniff-mode), the total current drawn of the
sensor unit can be reduced signiﬁcantly from 27 to 6 mA,
as shown in Figure 4. However, the Bluetooth low-power
mode has to be supported by both master (phone) and client
(sensor). Given the nominal battery capacity of 110 mAh,
the sensor unit can be operated up to 18 hours before it has
to be recharged. To prevent a sudden power failure, the
battery voltage is measured continuously and displayed on
the smartphone. While the current hardware design sup-
ports operation of the wearable sensing unit during an in-
terval which is in the order of a typical recharge cycle of
a modern smartphone, next generation hardware supporting
the upcoming Bluetooth 4.0 low energy standard will allow
to tremendously prolong the operation time of the sensor unit
using even smaller batteries.

SMARTPHONE APPLICATION
Measurement data from the wearable sensor unit is trans-
ferred over Bluetooth to a smartphone running the Google
Android operating system. The phone runs a background
service, which handles the Bluetooth communication with
the sensor device. The wearable sensing unit is polled pe-
riodically for new sensor measurements. All sensor read-
ings from the UVA and UVB photodiodes are stored together
with the corresponding timestamp and location information
provided by the phone. These measurements are made avail-
able to the user via the phone in real-time. This is in contrast
to existing UV dosimeters which only allow for ofﬂine anal-
ysis (see section on related work). Furthermore, data is writ-

]

A
m

[

t
n
e
r
r
u
C

]

A
m

[

t
n
e
r
r
u
C

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

Time [s]

(a) Bluetooth module in standard mode

2

4

6

8

10

Time [s]

(b) Bluetooth module in low-power mode

Figure 4. Current consumption of the sensing unit with an active Blue-
tooth connection for the standard (a) and low-power operation mode
(b). The horizontal line indicates the average power consumption mea-
sured for the normal operation mode (27 mA) or the low-power mode
(6 mA).

ten to the phone’s SD card for further analysis. If needed,
sensor readings can also be sent to a web server, if the phone
provides Wiﬁ or 3G connectivity.

Data Processing and Visualization
A considerable difference between stand-alone sensors and
smartphone based sensors systems is that the data processing
and displaying can be easily adapted to the needs of the use
case on smartphone based systems. In the case of Sundroid,
this allows us to adapt the system to various applications.
In the following we shortly describe two user interfaces we
have implemented for Sundroid.

Simple View. The ﬁrst use case is the one of a person that
has an outdoor job or likes to do outdoor sports and wants
to avoid skin damage by UV radiation. This user is mainly
interested in not being sunburned and avoiding long term
skin damage. In order to asses the danger of the accumu-
lated UV radiation to a person, we refer to the commonly
used method of Fitzpatrick’s skin typing [16]. It classiﬁes
a persons skin, based on external features, such as pigmen-
tation, tanning history, and eye color to estimate a minimal
erythema dose (MED) for that skin type. The minimal ery-
thema dose is deﬁned as the minimal solar radiation energy
that results in a reddening of the skin, that is not induced by
heat (i.e. sunburn) [16].

On top of the screen, a simple diagram informs the user
about the incident UV radiation he was exposed to that day
(see Figure 5). The plain energy value of the accumulated
incident UV radiation in J/cm2 would not be a valuable in-
formation for most users. Therefore we display aggregated
radiation energy in terms of the percentage of the user’s min-
imal erythema dose. As the minimal UV dose a person can

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China369 
 
Skin type Description

1
2
3
4
5
6

White, very fair skin
White, fair skin
Beige skin
Beige to brown skin
Dark brown skin
Black skin

MED in mJ
cm2
20 - 35
30 - 45
40 - 55
50 - 80
70 - 100
100

Table 2. The skin type and the corresponding minimal erythema doses
based on Fitzpatrick’s skin typing.

be exposed to without getting a sunburn depends mainly on
the skin type and the sun protection factor of the applied
sunscreen, these parameters can be set in the application and
are taken into account to asses the correct moment to issue a
warning. When the accumulated radiation intensity exceeds
80% of the MED (multiplied with the sun protection factor
of the applied sunscreen) the users is warned about the acute
danger of a sunburn through a notiﬁcation on the phone (see
Figure 6).

To inform the user about the current radiation intensity in an
easily understandable manner, the values of the UVA and the
UVB radiation are not displayed directly, but are combined
to match the erythema action spectrum. The resulting radi-
ation intensity is transformed into the according UV-index2
and displayed on the center of the screen (see Figure 5, left).
On the bottom of the screen the user can see the radiation
history of the day, which can serve as an educational com-
ponent, to learn in which situations the skin was exposed
to the highest radiation intensities. Beside processing the
data of the external sensors, the use of a smartphone allows
to gather more context information. For example, Sundroid
fetches the UV-index forecast of the day from the Internet.
The predicted UV-index can be used to inform the user on
time about necessary precautions, such as to take along ap-
propriate sunscreen or clothing.

Advanced View. The second user interface shows a more
technical view, which can be seen in Figure 5 on the right.
This view is mainly intended to be used by technical experts
(e.g. physicians, researchers or medical staff). It displays
the exact values of the incident UVA, UVB and accumulated
radiation. The graph on the bottom of the screen displays
the UVA and UVB radiation intensities separately. The live
feedback on the screen and the possibility to send the sensor
data to a central server in real time make it a useful tool for
UV-radiation related research (see Application Scenarios).

Data Fusion
The advantages of smartphones as a generic processing plat-
form are manifold. On the one hand, they are personal de-
vices that are almost always with their user. On the other
hand, they exhibit a variety of readily available sensors, such
as 3D compass, accelerometers, GPS, light sensor, camera,

2The UV-index is a common measure to communicate UV radia-
tion intensity to the general public. It is deﬁned to be the incident
UV radiation irradiance in the erythema action spectrum, divided
by 25 W

cm2 .

Figure 5. Sundroid activity screens on the smartphone: The Simple
View displays the accumulated UV dose, the current UV index, and the
time line of UV exposure (left). The Advanced View shows more detailed
information about the current and accumulated UV radiation (right).

Figure 6. A notiﬁcation window is shown when the absorbed UV radi-
ation exceeds a critical value for the speciﬁed skin type and sunscreen.

and microphone, from which the user’s context can be in-
ferred. In addition, state-of-the-art smartphones feature enor-
mous computing and communication capabilities, which pro-
vides a ﬂexible way to process and distribute the gathered
sensor data. Currently, we assign the current timestamp and
location of the user as provided by the GPS to each sensor
reading, which provides valuable context information for the
analysis of the measurement data.

EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate several aspects of the Sundroid
system. First, we compare the accuracy of UV measure-
ments against reference values. Second, we investigate the
sensitivity of the sensors with different incident angles of
sunlight.

Sensor Calibration
To ensure high accuracy of UV measurements, we have cal-
ibrated the sensor units against the erythema speciﬁc refer-
ence signal of the World Radiation Center (WRC) in Davos,
Switzerland. For the measurements, our sensor devices were
horizontally mounted on the roof of the WRC building, next
to the reference probes. Figure 7 compares the erythema
speciﬁc responses measured by the high-precision reference
equipment with those of our sensor devices during two days.
The ﬁrst measurement was conducted during a partly cloudy
day in autumn with some rain around 2.30 pm, and the sec-
ond measurement took place during a sunny day in winter.

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China3706

5

4

3

2

1

x
e
d
n
I

V
U

WRC Reference
Sundroid
Absolute Error

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

x
e
d
n
I

V
U

0
11

12

13
14
Hour of Day

15

16

0
9

10

11

WRC Reference
Sundroid
Absolute Error

14

15

16

12

13

Hour of Day

Figure 7. Sensor calibration: The sensors have been calibrated against
the reference measurement for the erythema action spectrum at the
World Radiation Center (WRC). The calibration measurements were
conducted on a partly cloudy day in autumn (left) and on a sunny day
in winter (right).

UVA Sensor
UVB Sensor
Cosine

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

UVA Sensor
UVB Sensor
Cosine

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

e
s
n
o
p
s
e
R
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
R

0
0

15

30

45
Angle [deg]

60

75

90

0
0

15

30

45
Angle [deg]

60

75

90

Figure 8. Relative response of the UVA/B photodiodes when exposed to
sunlight at different incident angles (left). Placing a PTFE diffuser foil
on top of the sensors results in a response which approaches the ideal
cosine curve (right).

Due to a bug in the recording software, a small number of
sensor readings have been lost during the ﬁrst measurement
day. Nevertheless, the good match of our sensor data with
the reference curve after calibration shows that our sensor
unit is able to accurately measure the UV radiation relevant
to erythema. In fact, the resulting relative error after cali-
bration is less than 5%. The linear correction factor used for
calibration needs to be known by the Sundroid application to
convert the raw UV measurements into the human readable
UV index scale.

Angle Dependencies
Clearly, the sensor sensitivity is dependent on the direction
of the incident radiation. Ideally, the response follows a co-
sine curve, similarly as the response of the human skin. Un-
fortunately, this curve is not well matched by the raw photo-
diodes, as shown in Figure 8 (left). To overcome this prob-
lem, we integrated a diffuser made from Polytetraﬂuoroethy-
lene (PTFE). PTFE, also known as Teﬂon, has been used
as a material for UV diffusers in similar contexts before [6,
1]. After applying a diffuser, the dependency on the angle
closely follows the ideal cosine curve as shown in Figure 8
(right). The ﬁgure shows that the use of a diffuser mitigates
angle dependencies, such that the (ideal) cosine response is
closely approximated. For these plots, we assumed that at
0 degrees (perpendicular to the incident sunlight) there is
only diffuse radiation. The corresponding intensity value
has been subtracted from the entire measurement series to
account for directed light only.

APPLICATION SCENARIOS
The modular design of the Sundroid system facilitates the
use not only as a personal assistant to track absorbed UV
radiation in everyday life, such as in personal informatics
systems [19], but also opens possibilities in a variety of other
settings. This section describes how Sundoid can be used in
a variety of contexts.

Behavioral Research. We believe that the real-time report-
ing capabilities, together with the possibility to grasp the
context of a given user, can considerably improve our under-
standing of the impact of UV radiation throughout different
activities. Using time and GPS information, for example,
we can precisely match the detected solar irradiation to a
person’s location. Using the phone’s 3D compass, the sun’s
incident angle becomes known, under the assumption that
the user keeps the phone in the same place on the body most
of the time. Furthermore, acceleration data, microphone, etc.
help to infer the user’s current activity. This additional infor-
mation might help to answer previously unanswered ques-
tions. Holman et al. [14], for example, speculate that some
of the differences they found compared to a manikin based
study [9] originate from the fact that people tend to turn away
from the sun. The additional sensor data (GPS, compass)
provided by the Sundroid system could help to prove or dis-
prove this conjecture.

Participatory Sensing. Our survey suggests a general in-
terest in using Sundroid as a personal assistant and warning
device, in particular when the sensor part is unobtrusively
integrated into clothing and/or accessories. If such a system
indeed happens to ﬁnd widespread use, information about
UV radiation can enter the domain of participatory sens-
ing [4]. Participatory sensing aims at collecting and sharing
sensor data gathered by the everyday use of mobile devices.
In the context of UV radiation, large scale UV maps could
be drawn at a much ﬁner resolution than currently possible,
thereby for example taking time, shadow, and reﬂection ef-
fects into account.

Applications in Therapy. In discussions with a dermatol-
ogist, we were pointed to a variety of medical application
scenarios. Examples include the different use cases in the
context of photodynamic therapy, UV induced immunosup-
pression, and the treatment of light allergies. Moreover, it
could be used to research the positive effects of sunlight, for
example in the production of vitamin D, circadian rhythm
regulation, or seasonal affective disorder.
In particular, a
wearable UV sensing device could help both, physicians as
well as patients to monitor the irradiation and user activity
over a longer period of time, thereby facilitating a more pre-
cise treatment at lower cost, as part of the monitoring task
is shifted from the physician to the patient. Via the mobile
network infrastructure the sensor data can be transmitted to
a physician in real-time, who can directly take adequate ac-
tions if required. Long-term irradiation traces can further be
used to improve people’s awareness of sunlight intensity in
different situations and are thus well suited for health related
behavior training.

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China371 
 
 
 
2

1

x
e
d
n
I

V
U

0
3000

2500

2000

1500

1000

10

]

m

[

e
d
u
t
i
t
l

A

Chest

Head

Shoulder

k
a
e
r
b
h
c
n
u
L

)
r
o
o
d
n
i
(

t
f
i
l

a
l
o
d
n
o
G

11

12
Hour of Day

13

14

Figure 9. Positioning of the three wearable sensor units during the ﬁeld
experiments: Unit 1 is attached on the helmet, Unit 2 is attached on the
shoulder, and Unit 3 is attached near the chest. The sensor units are
enclosed within a plastic housing to protect them from snow.

Figure 10. The elevation proﬁle of the test subject during one day of
snowboarding in a ski resort (bottom) and the measured UV intensity
of the different Sundroid sensors (top).

PILOT STUDY
In order to demonstrate the practical usability of the system
and to investigate the effects of sensor placement in a real-
world setting, we have conducted a small scale pilot study.
The study encompassed two different outdoor sport activies:
snowboarding and climbing. In both experiments the inci-
dent UV radiation on a single test subject was measured over
several hours.

Scenario 1: Snowboarding
The snowboarding experiment was conducted in a large ski
resort. We have attached three Sundroid sensor units to the
test subject: One on the helmet, facing upwards, one on the
shoulder, facing upwards, and one on the chest, facing front-
wards, as shown in Figure 9. The test subject’s task was to
use all the ski lifts and slopes freely. Beside the UV intensity
values we tracked the location of the person using GPS. The
location and the UV data was logged on the Android mobile
phone carried by the person. From the location, an elevation
proﬁle was derived that can be seen in Figure 10 along with
the plot of the measured UV radiation of the three sensor
units. In the plot, one can clearly see two periods of zero
UV radiation; the ﬁrst of them, around 12 pm, was caused
by a lunch break in a restaurant. The second one, around
1.30 pm, was caused by a trip in a closed cabin gondola lift.

This day trace provides a good example of how the Sundroid
system can be used in scientiﬁc experiments. One can gain
different insights by analyzing the UV radiation traces.

1.5

1

0.5

x
e
d
n
I

V
U

0
1500

2000

Altitude [m]

2500

3000

Figure 11. UV intensity versus altitude of the test subject during the
ride on the longest ski slope. The correlation of altitude over mean sea
level and UV radiation is clearly visible.

diation, as measured by a horizontally placed dosimeter, is
received at the shoulder, which is slightly less than the doses
measured at the vertex of the head. Moreover, under lightly
cloudy weather conditions, the incident radiation at the chest
is stated to be about two thirds of the radiation measured at
the shoulder.

However in the case of the snowboard trip, the measured in-
tensity ratios of the three sensors (on the head, shoulder and
chest), differ signiﬁcantly from the values reported in [14]:
In particular, the sensor mounted on the chest absorbed about
10% more energy than the sensor mounted on the head. These
differences can, presumably, be explained by the low posi-
tion of the sun during winter days and the substantial amount
of UV reﬂection by the snow. Such factors have shown to
have a relevant impact by Gr¨obner et al. [11].

For instance the role of the sensor placement (i.e. where a
user is wearing the sensing unit) can be studied. Prior re-
search using a rotating manikin has shown that the weather
conditions (i.e. amount of clouds) affect the overall UV in-
tensity, but play a minor role for the proportions of sunlight
absorbed by different sites of the body [9]. Further studies on
living subjects have shown high and relatively stable values
for measurements on the shoulder for different outdoor oc-
cupations, namely gardener, roof carpenter, bricklayer [14].
The reported values show that roughly 70% of the total ra-

Another interesting observation discussed in [11] is the de-
pendency between UV radiation and the altitude above sea
level. The data of the longest downhill drive (around 1 pm)
conﬁrms such a dependency. Figure 11 shows the measured
intensities versus the current altitude of the test subject. It is
important to note that the measured decrease of UV intensity
at lower altitudes cannot be explained by the elevation level
alone. Other effects, such as an increased amount of shadow
in lower areas, or the direction of the slope are also likely to
have an inﬂuence.

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China372 
 
 
2

/

m
W
m
n
i

n
o
i
t
a
i
d
a
R

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

UVA
UVB

200

150

100

50

D
E
M

f
o

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

10

11

12

13

14
Hour of Day

15

16

17

0
13.5

14

14.5
Hour of Day

15

15.5

Figure 12. The left plot shows the incident radiation during one day
of climbing on a sunny spring day. On the right, one can see the accu-
mulated radiation energy, expressed as percentage of the MED for the
different skin types. The blue line on top is skin type 1, whereas the
blue line on the bottom is skin type 6.

This experiment demonstrates that the Sundroid system can
be used to gain insights into the effects of sensor placement
in different environments and to improve the understanding
of the surface albedo in various settings. Moreover, the rel-
atively cheap hardware allows to realize studies with a large
number of participants.

Scenario 2: Climbing
Another measurement series were conducted during one day
of climbing on a sunny spring day. We attached one Sun-
droid sensor at the climber’s harness, which measured the
incident sun radiation on the back of the test person. Plots
of the recorded UVA and UVB radiation can be seen in Fig-
ure 12 (left). Figure 12 (right) plots the accumulated energy
in the erythema action spectrum as percentage of the mini-
mal erythema dose for the skin types 1 to 6. The lowest blue
line corresponds to the percentage of the MED, a person with
skin type 6 would have been exposed to, whereas the high-
est blue line corresponds to the percentage of the MED of a
person with skin type 1.

The UV forecast of the national meteorological institute for
that day was UV index 5. As one can see, the radiation was
high enough to exceed the minimal erythema dose for skin
type 1 and skin type 2. However, a person with skin type 1
would have been warned around 2 pm about the high radia-
tion energy (80% of the MED), which would have allowed
the person to apply sunscreen, or seek shadow in time. Sim-
ilarly, a person with skin type 2 would have been warned
around 40 minutes later, which again would have been early
enough to take precautions.

CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
We have presented Sundroid, a wearable prototype system
designed to increase the awareness of solar radiation by means
of body worn sensors. Our experiments show that despite
the use of low cost components, the accuracy reached by
our sensor unit is comparable with the one of high-precision
infrastructure. In a survey we could further show that a rele-
vant fraction of people could imagine using such a system to
reduce sun-related health problems. Our prototype demon-
strates the potential of combining wearable sensors with a
smartphone. If the Sundroid sensor is worn during everyday
activities, it can notify people in time about the imminent

risk of a sunburn. The modular design featuring a smart-
phone as a versatile platform facilitates the use in several
other settings, such as medical therapies and research. We
are convinced that technological advances will empower the
seamless integration of a variety of sensors in clothing and
accessories, making systems such as Sundroid a ubiquitous
part of our daily life.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Dr. G¨unter Hofbauer from the De-
partment of Dermatology at the University Hospital Zurich
for his useful advice and feedback on the prototype platform.
Furthermore, we thank Dr. Julian Gr¨obner of the World Ra-
diation Center in Davos, Switzerland for his support during
the calibration measurements.

REFERENCES
1. M. Allen and R. McKenzie. Dosimeter badges to

monitor personal UV doses. In NIWA UV Workshop,
2010.

2. A. Armstrong, A. Watson, M. Makredes, J. Frangos,

A. Kimball, and J. Kvedar. Text-message reminders to
improve sunscreen use: a randomized, controlled trial
using electronic monitoring. Archives of dermatology,
145(11):1230, 2009.

3. D. E. Brash, J. A. Rudolph, J. A. Simon, A. Lin, G. J.

Mckenna, H. P. Baden, A. J. Halperin, and J. Ponten. A
role for sunlight in skin cancer: UV-induced p53
mutations in squamous cell carcinoma. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 88(22):10124–10128, 1991.

4. J. Burke, D. Estrin, M. Hansen, A. Parker,

N. Ramanathan, S. Reddy, and M. Srivastava.
Participatory sensing. In WSW, 2006.

5. G. Chen, B. Yan, M. Shin, D. Kotz, and E. Berke.

MPCS: Mobile-phone based patient compliance system
for chronic illness care. In MobiQuitous, 2009.

6. S. David. Personal UV Dosimeter Badges: Mark II. In

NIWA UV Workshop, 2010.

7. F. de Gruijl, H. Sterenborg, P. Forbes, R. Davies,

C. Cole, G. Kelfkens, H. van Weelden, H. Slaper, and
J. van der Leun. Wavelength dependence of skin cancer
induction by ultraviolet irradiation of albino hairless
mice. Cancer research, 53(1):53, 1993.

8. A. Dey and G. Abowd. Cybreminder: A context-aware

system for supporting reminders. In HUC, 2000.

9. B. Diffey, M. Kerwin, and A. Davis. The anatomical

distribution of sunlight. British Journal of
Dermatology, 97(4):407–410, 1977.

10. S. Forjuoh, M. Reis, G. Couchman, and M. Ory.
Improving Diabetes Self-Care with a PDA in
Ambulatory Care. Telemedicine and e-Health,
14(3):273–279, 2008.

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China373 
 
 
 
 
 
11. J. Gr¨obner, D. Pavel, H. G., and B. M. Effect of snow
albedo and topography on UV radiation. In NIWA UV
Workshop, 2010.

12. J. Heydenreich and H. Wulf. Miniature Personal

Electronic UVR Dosimeter with Erythema Response
and Time-stamped Readings in a Wristwatch.
Photochemistry and photobiology, 2005.

13. J. Ho and S. Intille. Using context-aware computing to
reduce the perceived burden of interruptions from
mobile devices. In CHI, 2005.

14. C. Holman, I. Gibson, S. M., and B. Armstrong.

Ultraviolet irradiation of human body sites in relation
to occupation and outdoor activity: ﬁeld studies using
personal UVR dosimeters. Clinical and Experimental
Dermatology, 8(3):269–277, 1983.

15. G. Horneck. Quantiﬁcation of the biological

effectiveness of environmental UV radiation. Journal of
Photochemistry and Photobiology B: Biology,
31(1-2):43–49, 1995.

16. F. Im, A. Eisen, K. Wolff, A. Kf, G. La, and S. Katz.
Fitzpatrick’s dermatology in general medicine, 2000.

17. A. Kessell and C. Chan. Castaway: a context-aware

task management system. In CHI, 2006.

18. O. Kwon and S. Choi. Applying associative theory to
need awareness for personalized reminder system.
Expert Systems with Applications, 2008.

19. I. Li, A. Dey, and J. Forlizzi. A stage-based model of

personal informatics systems. In CHI ’10: Proceedings
of the 28th international conference on Human factors
in computing systems, pages 557–566. ACM, 2010.

20. A. Logan, W. McIsaac, A. Tisler, M. Irvine,

A. Saunders, A. Dunai, C. Rizo, D. Feig, M. Hamill,
M. Trudel, et al. Mobile Phone-Based Remote Patient
Monitoring System for Management of Hypertension
in Diabetic Patients. American journal of hypertension,
20(9):942–948, 2007.

21. P. Ludford, D. Frankowski, K. Reily, K. Wilms, and
L. Terveen. Because I carry my cell phone anyway:
functional location-based reminder applications. In
CHI, 2006.

22. J. Lundell, T. Hayes, S. Vurgun, U. Ozertem, J. Kimel,

J. Kaye, F. Guilak, and M. Pavel. Continuous activity
monitoring and intelligent contextual prompting to
improve medication adherence. In EMBS, 2007.

23. E. Miluzzo, N. Lane, K. Fodor, R. Peterson, H. Lu,

M. Musolesi, S. Eisenman, X. Zheng, and
A. Campbell. Sensing meets mobile social networks:
the design, implementation and evaluation of the
cenceme application. In SenSys, 2008.

24. M. Moehrle, B. Dennenmoser, and C. Garbe.

Continuous long-term monitoring of UV radiation in
professional mountain guides reveals extremely high
exposure. International Journal of Cancer,
103(6):775–778, 2003.

25. M. Mor´on, J. Luque, A. Botella, E. Cuberos,

E. Casilari, and A. D´ıaz-Estrella. J2ME and smart
phones as platform for a Bluetooth Body Area Network
for Patient-telemonitoring. In EMBS, 2007.

26. L. Nachman, A. Baxi, S. Bhattacharya, V. Darera,

P. Deshpande, N. Kodalapura, V. Mageshkumar,
S. Rath, J. Shahabdeen, and R. Acharya. Jog Falls: A
Pervasive Healthcare Platform for Diabetes
Management. Pervasive Computing, 2010.

27. S. Nylander, T. Lundquist, A. Br¨annstr¨om, and

B. Karlson. “It’s Just Easier with the Phone”–A Diary
Study of Internet Access from Cell Phones. Pervasive
Computing, 2009.

28. H. Pinnock, R. Slack, C. Pagliari, D. Price, and

A. Sheikh. Understanding the potential role of mobile
phone-based monitoring on asthma self-management:
qualitative study. Clinical & Experimental Allergy,
37(5):794–802, 2007.

29. E. D. Pleasance et al. A comprehensive catalogue of
somatic mutations from a human cancer genome.
Nature, 463(7278):191–196, Dec. 2009.

30. H. W. Rogers, M. A. Weinstock, A. R. Harris, M. R.
Hinckley, S. R. Feldman, A. B. Fleischer, and B. M.
Coldiron. Incidence Estimate of Nonmelanoma Skin
Cancer in the United States, 2006. Arch Dermatol,
146(3):283–287, Mar. 2010.

31. R. Setlow. The wavelengths in sunlight effective in

producing skin cancer: a theoretical analysis. Proc. of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States
of America, 71(9):3363, 1974.

32. D. Siewiorek, A. Smailagic, J. Furukawa, A. Krause,
N. Moraveji, K. Reiger, J. Shaffer, and F. Wong.
Sensay: A context-aware mobile phone. In Wearable
Computers, 2003.

33. M. Sneyd and B. Cox. The control of melanoma in
New Zealand. Journal of the New Zealand Medical
Association, 119:1242, 2006.

34. T. Sohn, K. Li, G. Lee, I. Smith, J. Scott, and

W. Griswold. Place-its: A study of location-based
reminders on mobile phones. UbiComp, 2005.

35. S. Sultan and P. Mohan. myDR: Improving the

Self-Care Process for Caribbean Patients with Diabetes
through Mobile Learning. International Journal of
Education and Development using Information and
Communication Technologies, 5(4), 2009.

36. E. Thieden, P. A. Philipsen, J. Sandby-Moller, and

H. C. Wulf. Sunburn related to uv radiation exposure,
age, sex, occupation, and sun bed use based on
time-stamped personal dosimetry and sun behavior
diaries. Arch Dermatol, 141(4), 2005.

37. D. Trossen and D. Pavel. Building a ubiquitous

platform for remote sensing using smartphones. In
MobiQuitous, 2005.

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China374