Supporting Coping with Parkinson’s Disease Through
Self-Tracking

Sonali R. Mishra
University of Washington School of
Information
Seattle, Washington
srmishra@uw.edu

Predrag Klasnja
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, Michigan
klasnja@umich.edu

John MacDuffie Woodburn
Sage Bionetworks
Seattle, Washington
woody.macduffie@sagebase.org

Eric B. Hekler
University of California San Diego
San Diego, California
ehekler@ucsd.edu

Larsson Omberg
Sage Bionetworks
Seattle, Washington
larsson.omberg@sagebase.org

Michael Kellen
Sage Bionetworks
Seattle, Washington
mike.kellen@sagebase.org

Lara Mangravite
Sage Bionetworks
Seattle, Washington
lara.mangravite@sagebase.org

ABSTRACT
Self-tracking can help people understand their medical condi-
tion and the factors that influence their symptoms. However,
it is unclear how tracking technologies should be tailored to
help people cope with the progression of a degenerative dis-
ease. To understand how smartphone apps and other tracking
technologies can support people in coping with an incurable
illness, we interviewed both people with Parkinson’s Disease
(n=17) and care partners (n=6) who help people with Parkin-
son’s manage their lives. We describe how symptom trackers
can help people identify and solve problems to improve their
quality of life, the role symptom trackers can play in helping
people combat their own tendencies towards avoidance and
denial, and the complex role of care partners in defining and
tracking ambiguous symptoms. Our findings yield insights
that can guide the design of tracking technologies to help
people with Parkinson’s Disease accept and plan for their
condition.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in
HCI.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-
party components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact
the owner/author(s).

CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5970-2/19/05.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300337

KEYWORDS
Symptom tracking, personal informatics, health informatics,
Parkinson’s Disease, coping with chronic disease, quality of
life.

ACM Reference Format:
Sonali R. Mishra, Predrag Klasnja, John MacDuffie Woodburn, Eric
B. Hekler, Larsson Omberg, Michael Kellen, and Lara Mangravite.
2019. Supporting Coping with Parkinson’s Disease Through Self-
Tracking. In CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems Proceedings (CHI 2019), May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK.
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 16 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.
3300337

1 INTRODUCTION
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disease whose
prevalence increases with age [70, 75] and reaches 2.6% in
people 85-89 years old [70]. Within the US, about a half a
million people live with PD [62], a number which is expected
to grow to nearly a million by 2030 [49]. PD can be treated
with a variety of medications, but not cured.

People with PD (PwP) struggle with a variety of symptoms,
including motor and cognitive impairments that can reduce
people’s quality of life [62]. The motor symptoms tremor,
bradykinesia (i.e., slow movement), and rigidity (i.e., stiffness
around joints) are the cardinal features of PD and perhaps
what it is best known for, but PwP can also experience a
large range of other motor symptoms such as speech im-
pairment, a shuffling gait, and dystonia (a type of muscle
cramp), as well as non-motor symptoms such as gastroin-
testinal problems, dementia, psychosis, and sleep disorders
[12]. The rate of progression of symptoms is highly variable

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 1between individuals [81], and not all individuals develop the
same symptoms [61]. In addition, symptom severity fluctu-
ates in the short term and can be impacted by factors like
stress [44]. As a result, living with PD is characterized by "the
experience of living with and managing unpredictability,"
with the knowledge of eventual loss of independence [28].

Although the symptoms of PD can be quite disabling, the
impact of the disease on people’s quality of life is not fully
explained by severity of symptoms [8, 25, 44]. Researchers
have suggested that this is because the types of coping strate-
gies used affect PwP’s quality of life [8, 25, 44]. Coping is
the performance of cognitive and behavioral strategies to
manage stress [80], and individuals can use more than one
coping strategy in response to a given situation, for example
by changing from one strategy to another [20]. Researchers
have used a variety of frameworks to classify and evaluate
individual coping strategies across populations [80], but in
the context of PD, coping strategies geared towards problem-
solving, meaning the application of logical problem-solving
techniques to improve a situation, have been associated with
improved quality of life [8] and greater well-being [44]. These
strategies are called "positive" or "adaptive" coping strate-
gies, and include behaviors like making and carrying out a
plan of action, and coming up with solutions to a problem
[21]. By contrast, coping strategies geared towards avoiding
or denying the situation have been associated with worse
quality of life in PwP [8] and worse psychological adjust-
ment to the disease [44], although other studies suggest that
denial can sometimes be adaptive [38, 39] and a balanced
approach with a mix of the two may be best in the context
of PD [78]. Examples of escape-avoidance coping include
strategies like refusing to believe that something has hap-
pened, and fantasizing about how things might be different
[21]. Coping strategies associated with lower quality of life
are often called "negative" or "maladaptive."

Although HCI researchers have explored how self-tracking
supports self-management of chronic illness (e.g. [3, 45, 48]),
more work is needed to understand the role tracking tech-
nologies can play in helping people cope with progressive
decline. In other contexts, researchers have noted that self-
tracking applications fail to keep up with changes in users’
lives [18]. Given the constant change of life with PD, and the
impact that the strategies PwP use to cope with that change
can have on their quality of life, it is important to understand
how technologies designed to support people in managing
their illness can influence PwP’s strategies for coping with
decline in their condition.

We explored the following research question: how can track-
ing technologies be designed to help people cope with pro-
gressive decline? To investigate this question, we interviewed
both PwP and their care partners (friends and family mem-
bers who help the PwP manage their disease) about their
symptom-tracking practices and their attitudes towards symptom-
tracking. We included care partners because PwP often work
with care partners to manage their illness [66]. In this pa-
per, we illustrate how self-tracking technologies can support
PwP and their care partners cope with disease progression
by helping them pursue positive coping strategies and com-
bat their tendencies towards maladaptive avoidance. We also
describe how ambiguous symptoms in PD can cause tensions
between PwP and care partner. Finally, we discuss design
implications for creating tracking technologies for PwP and
their care partners.

2 BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
To understand how self-tracking can fit into life with PD, it is
important to understand how PD is currently evaluated and
treated. We give some general background on the evaluation
and treatment of PD to contextualize our findings. We also
summarize some of the related work in HCI on self-tracking
in the context of chronic disease and on support for PD.

Evaluation and Treatment of Parkinson’s Disease
PwP see their clinicians (often neurologists and movement
disorder specialists) in appointments spaced months apart.
Clinicians typically evaluate patients using a scale called the
Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), a ques-
tionnaire with items measuring a variety of symptoms of PD
[24]. Although non-motor symptoms significantly impact
quality of life [7, 9], neurologists typically focus on evaluat-
ing and treating motor symptoms [7].

To control their motor symptoms, many PwP take drugs like
levodopa which are known for being very fast-acting, and
lasting for anywhere from 2-6 hours [67]. As the drugs wear
off, symptoms resurface, leading many PwP to experience
"on" and "off" periods, when the drugs are either working
or not working [62]. PwP also must balance the benefits
of the treatment with side effects like dyskinesia, meaning
involuntary movement related to levodopa [89]. Exercise
can also give PwP temporary relief from pain and tempo-
rary improvement in some motor function [90]. PwP also
sometimes manage their symptoms by taking medication
in conjunction with Deep Brain Stimulation (DBS), a device
implanted in the brain that uses electric currents to help PwP
manage their symptoms, and which can drastically reduce
the amount of medication needed [88]. However, even with
appropriate use of these kinds of treatments, PD remains
incurable, and the symptoms will eventually progress.

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 2Self-Tracking in the Context of Chronic Illness
HCI researchers have studied self-tracking in the context of
several chronic illnesses, including diabetes [46, 48], bipo-
lar disease [4, 50, 51], chronic pain [19], multiple sclerosis
[3], migraine [82], irritable bowel syndrome [33], and others.
Much of this work has focused on how tracking tools support
self-management, for instance by helping people understand
how different factors affect their illness and gain a sense of
control [3, 33, 52], as well as gather data to share with clini-
cians to manage their care [14, 60, 94, 97] or even conduct
clinical screenings on themselves at home [32]. Researchers
have also investigated how family members can participate
in tracking symptoms [74], and how tracking systems can
better help patients communicate their symptoms with fam-
ily members [29]. Recently, researchers have also explored
how tracking technologies can help users contribute knowl-
edge to shed light on "enigmatic" diseases [54].

Researchers have found that self-tracking supports a variety
of goals in addition to self-management of health. For in-
stance, people suffering from migraines use self-tracking in
part to gain recognition from their clinicians [82]. Mamykina
et al. found that people self-tracking for diabetes manage-
ment also used the system to aid in identity construction
[47], while Matthews et al. found that manual and automated
tracking could have different impacts on people with bipolar
disorder’s identity construction [50]. MacLeod et al. found
that self-tracking enabled people to develop a sense of cu-
riosity and exploration, and that people valued being able to
generate data for medical research [45].

However, most of the work on self-tracking has focused
on conditions where health outcomes can be controlled or
at least stabilized through behavior (e.g. diabetes), or where
there is no expected decline (e.g. bipolar disorder). By con-
trast, degenerative conditions like PD mean that people di-
agnosed must expect their condition to worsen over time,
no matter what they do. Although degenerative conditions
have been studied in the literature [3], more work needs
to be done to understand how the design of tracking tech-
nologies can help or hurt people dealing with the inevitable
progression of a degenerative illness.

HCI Research on Parkinson’s Disease
Researchers in HCI and health informatics have done much
work on developing systems to measure and monitor the
symptoms of PD, including mobile phone systems [2, 40, 63,
64, 96], image processing of handwriting [73], wireless and
wearable sensors [27, 30, 42, 43, 53], and many others. Much
of this work has focused on the development of the systems,
and has been instrumental in demonstrating the potential of

technology to successfully monitor the symptoms of PD in a
quantified way. Researchers have also highlighted how mo-
bile technologies have the potential to improve the quality
of life of PwP by monitoring non-motor symptoms through
markers like social interactions [87] and the amount of dis-
tance a PwP travels in a day [40]. However, these systems
often do not provide data back to the PwP, although some
offer data to clinicians [17, 27, 59].

Other work has examined how PwP themselves could or
do use tracking or other technologies to live with and man-
age their disease. Researchers have examined how to sup-
port PwP in staying active and maintaining correct posture
through exergaming [23, 41, 56, 85], as well as how to help
PwP communicate with clinicians [60, 65, 72, 95] and conduct
self-experimentation [79]. McNaney et al. have investigated
how technologies can help people become more aware of PD
symptoms like soft speech and drooling [55, 57] and how sys-
tems like Google Glass can be used to notify PwP when their
medications are wearing off or when they are experiencing
freezing symptoms (when a person is temporarily unable to
move) [58]. Several researchers [58, 68, 92] have also noted
the need for accessibility in tracking technologies designed
for PwP. Vega et al. found that PwP preferred paper-based
diaries for self-report for a variety of reasons, including that
it was easier for people to physically enter information, and
that their paper-based diary was designed to reduce user
burden [92]. However, mobile technologies have also been
found valuable for self-tracking. In a clinical deployment of
a self-tracking app designed to be used in conjunction with
clinicians, Lakshminarayana et al. found use of the app led
to improved medication compliance and quality of clinician
consultations [37].

Some researchers have found that PwP desire not just med-
icalized symptom trackers, but technologies for self-care,
meaning technologies that help people live their lives be-
yond merely tracking symptoms [67]. Nunes et al. found
that PwP desired technologies that could help them focus
on everyday tasks like medication taking and exercise [67].
In addition, researchers have stressed the importance of de-
signing to support active collaboration between PwP and
care partners in self-care [66, 67, 72], because care partners
collaborate with PwP in every aspect of self-care [66].

Although researchers have found that technology for PwP
must adapt to people’s changing condition [85? ], little work
has been done on how tracking technologies can be designed
to help people cope with this change. McNaney et al. found
that PwP can be reluctant to track their decline [56], un-
derscoring the fact that tracking technologies are not neu-
tral recorders of a person’s condition, but something that

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 3users interact with actively in changing contexts [67] that
influence them psychologically. More work must be done to
investigate how tracking technologies should be designed to
help people with PD understand and approach the inevitable
progression of their disease.

3 METHODS
To understand how symptom trackers could support or hin-
der PwP in confronting decline, we conducted interviews
with both PwP and care partners. We included care partners
in our sample because PD requires work from care partners
as well as from the person diagnosed [66, 67]. Participants
were recruited through several channels. First, we recruited
people from a local PD exercise class by attending the class,
describing the study, and inviting class members to partici-
pate. This was done with permission from the class instructor.
Second, we recruited participants through social media and
word of mouth. Third, we recruited people by reaching out
to participants in two separate studies involving PD mobile
apps, both taking place in the United States. For these partici-
pants, study organizers reached out to potential participants
with information about the study, and people interested in
participating contacted us. Fourth, we recruited new partici-
pants through snowball sampling by asking people who had
already agreed to participate if their primary care partner
would also be willing to participate, or if they knew any
other PwP or care partner who might be willing to partici-
pate. Members of the research team discussed themes arising
from the data as interviews progressed, and recruitment con-
tinued until we reached saturation. Note that we use the
term "care partners" rather than the more usual "caregivers"
because many participants strongly disliked the word "care-
giver". In total, we interviewed 17 PwP, including 12 men
and 5 women. PwP participants ranged in age from 48-74
(mean 61.2, median 61), and had been diagnosed between 1
and 19 years previously (mean 7.9 years, median 7 years). We
interviewed 6 care partners, all women, ranging in age from
26-65 (mean 53.6, median 58, with age for one care partner
not reported). In some cases, we interviewed care partners
of interview participants (P01-C, P02-C, P03-C, P08-C); in
others, we interviewed care partners but did not interview
the PwP (P12-C, P14-C). Four care partners were the PwP’s
primary care partner (their spouse in all cases) (P01-C, P02-C,
P08-C, P14-C); one was the PwP’s granddaughter (P12-C);
and one was the PwP’s workplace assistant (P03-C). Since
P03-C chose to participate as part of P03’s interview rather
than independently, in total we conducted 22 interviews
rather than 23 interviews.

Interviews were conducted either in person or remotely over
video conference, based on the participant’s availability and
preference. Participants were drawn from all over the United

States. We asked participants questions about a variety of top-
ics, including: their current symptom tracking habits, such as
what kinds of things they found important to track and why
tracking these things were important to them; how they pre-
pared for clinic visits and what kinds of questions they had
about their symptoms; and what kind of information they
thought was most important to capture about symptoms,
such as objective measures (where possible), notes about the
context, and other data points. As mentioned earlier, mem-
bers of the research team met regularly to discuss emergent
themes from the findings. Through discussion of the first few
interviews (P01, P01-C, P02, P02-C, P03, P03-C), we identified
four potential use-cases of self-tracking technologies that we
wanted to explore further: tracking long-term progression,
sharing tracked data with clinicians to manage medication,
self-tracking to identify factors that affected symptoms, and
having a care partner track symptoms for someone with PD.

Figure 1: Excerpt from a storyboard used in interviews. A
PwP wonders how they have been doing over the last 6
months, takes a finger tap test, and views a declining trend
in results from the last 6 months. The last square in the fig-
ure has an empty thought bubble so that interview partici-
pants could voice their own reactions.

To help us explore these themes with participants, we
created four storyboards and added them to the end of the
interview protocol (see Fig. 1 for an excerpt from a story-
board and auxiliary materials for all storyboards). Starting

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 4with P04, we began the interview by asking our original in-
terview questions, but partway through the interview would
show participants the storyboards and walk them through
the four use-cases as represented in the storyboards. After
introducing each storyboard, we asked participants about
their reactions to the storyboard and what value or chal-
lenges this use case represented for that participant. Using
the storyboards enabled us to focus the interview on themes
relating to long-term tracking, viewing data about decline,
and involving care partners in symptom tracking. In addi-
tion, because three of the storyboards prominently featured
a particular symptom tracking metric—the finger tap test (a
test in which the user taps on two circles on the screen with
alternate fingers for a set period of time, yielding metrics
like total tap count as well as more abstract measurements
like the user’s accuracy in hitting the circles)—they helped
us discuss with participants the value of different types of
symptom tracking measures. Interviews were recorded and
transcribed. One member of the research team analyzed the
data using an inductive thematic coding process [71]. Specif-
ically, one member of the team began by conducting open
coding [15] on the transcripts, then discussed themes in the
data with other members of team and iteratively refined
the codebook. Because our focus was not to understand the
differences between PwP’s needs and the needs of care part-
ners, but rather to get a holistic picture of what role symptom
tracking technologies could play for PwP, we analyzed data
from PwP and care partners together and present them as
one participant pool. In the findings, we include both PwP
and care partners in the term "participants" unless otherwise
specified. This study was approved by Western Institutional
Review Board.

4 FINDINGS
Participants’ current tracking habits were mixed: some cur-
rently tracked their symptoms, some did not. Most of those
who did not track cited as a reason the lack of good tools
for doing so. Overall, our participants were enthusiastic
about the potential of self-tracking for helping them to ap-
proach their disease with a problem-solving orientation as it
changed over time. Moreover, participants saw certain kinds
of self-tracking technologies as a way to help them combat
their own tendencies towards avoidance coping strategies
and to confront their current condition honestly. However,
participants experienced symptoms they could not track
themselves, and sometimes struggled to differentiate symp-
toms that were caused by PD from symptoms that arose
from other causes or even from everyday life. Participants
discussed how care partners could aid in tracking ambiguous
symptoms, but also how such aid could lead to tension in the
determination of what counted as a symptom of PD. Below
we give a more detailed report on our findings.

Current Tracking Habits and Attitudes Towards
Tracking
Some of our participants currently tracked their symptoms
or had in the past, and some did not, either because they had
just been diagnosed or because they simply did not see the
value. Eight participants currently kept track of their symp-
toms through some form of journaling on paper or mobile
apps. Four participants used to keep a formal log of their
symptoms on paper or digitally, but had stopped because the
tool was too frustrating to use and did not give them what
they needed, or because they no longer wanted to. Eleven par-
ticipants did not formally keep track of the PwP’s symptoms.

Overall, both participants who currently tracked their symp-
toms and participants who did not were enthusiastic about
tracking not just symptoms, but also medications and var-
ious environmental, behavioral, and health-related factors
that might affect the PwP’s symptoms. For instance, P01-C
and P11 were interested in tracking how diet affected medi-
cation efficacy, and P02 was interested in tracking how low
light conditions and health metrics like his blood pressure
and weight affected his symptoms. In fact, only a couple
of participants, like P01 and P10, did not find self-tracking
valuable. P01 compared tracking the progression of his symp-
toms to knowing his net worth, saying it "might be interest-
ing information but it’s also kind of meaningless". P10 had
stopped tracking because her symptoms were not changing
very much and because she did not want to think about her
symptoms every day. Other participants who did not track,
however, cited the lack of good tools for tracking symptoms.
Most did not know that mobile apps for tracking PD symp-
toms existed at all; the few who had tried some out generally
did not find them satisfactory. For instance, P06 had tried sev-
eral PD tracking apps, but ultimately rejected them because
they cost money, were designed for clinicians, and/or did not
let him retrieve data in a time period useful to him, instead
restricting his data retrieval to the last week. Some of the
participants who did not track their symptoms regretted this
choice, and wished that they had been self-tracking earlier
in the illness. For instance, P03 said that some of her symp-
toms had improved and she wished she had data "because
I would have an idea of what’s going on." However, she was
concerned that, "because I’m starting so late in the game, and
there’s no easy way for me to track," it would be impossible
for her to start now.

Self-Tracking to Support Planful Problem Solving
Participants saw tracking technologies as tools that could
help them plan for changes in their condition over the long

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 5and short term. For the long term, participants wanted symp-
tom trackers to help them monitor their long-term progres-
sion to help them view decline as something to be planned
for rather than a black box. For the short term, participants
wanted tools that could help them work with clinicians be-
tween visits on changes to their medications. Some partici-
pants also felt that the framing of data was important for help-
ing PwP adopt a problem-solving orientation to change in
condition. These sentiments reflect the need for ’planful prob-
lem solving’ (i.e., the application of "logical problem-solving
strategies" to improve a situation), which has been associated
with higher health-related quality of life in PwP [8]. Partic-
ipants saw tracking technologies as tools that could help
them apply planful problem solving strategies to changes in
their condition.

Self-Tracking Over the Long Term. Participants knew that
change would happen to them sooner or later: their symp-
toms would eventually progress. To deal with that change,
some participants wanted tracking tools that could help them
identify and plan for problems as soon as they developed.
As P19 put it, " . . . don’t sit back and let the disease happen
to you." To "slow the progress of the disease, if possible," P19
researched and tried out new techniques to control his symp-
toms, and tracked his symptoms for clinical studies and his
own purposes.

In the long term, some participants wanted to track their
progression because in order to plan for it. A few partici-
pants were not interested in tracking their progression, like
P01 quoted earlier. However, even though progression in PD
can be difficult to predict, other participants wanted data
to offer them guidance in making long-term planning deci-
sions. For example, P05 commented, "I just happen to be one
of those that wants to know my state of decline. I’m 61 years
old. I’ve got a grandson that’s four and another grandson that’s
20 months. Do I need to make sure and do things with them
sooner versus later? And [tracking] helps me make lifestyle
and preparation decisions, probably a little more succinctly
than I would otherwise." Similarly, P03 wanted to map out her
progression so that she could predict when "you’re gonna be
useless. Then there might a point that you wanna intervene
before you become useless, right?"
Self-Tracking Over the Short Term. PwP often see their clini-
cians in appointments months apart or more. Participants
wanted tracking technologies that could help them track
their symptoms against their medications so that they could
work with their clinicians between visits to adjust their med-
ication as their needs changed. Self-tracking systems were
tools that could help them take action to solve issues that
arose with their medication. For example, P18, who tracked
his symptoms and medication extensively using a variety of

tools, said he had gotten started with self-tracking because
his neurologist "didn’t know how to tweak things [related to
medications and DBS] to . . . help with [my] symptoms". Par-
ticipants also worried that relying solely on their neurology
visits to resolve problems would leave them helpless to re-
solve issues for long periods of time. As P15 said, "I think
that if it’s [limited to] visits, I think that’s too long a period
of time. . . . there needs to be a shorter feedback period. . . . as a
patient, I don’t want to be mis-medicated for any longer than I
need to be." Similarly, P18, who had recently gotten DBS and
was still trying to find the right medication regimen to fit his
new situation, wanted to be able to "record stuff either right
there [in the clinic] or even when you’re not there and be able
to take that to your doctor and have [your DBS and treatment]
being able to be changed . . . ."

To make adjustments to their medications, participants needed
fine-grained data about their symptoms. For instance, P11
envisioned a tool that would help her measure her on and off
periods by letting her measure her symptoms several times
over the course of a few hours, so that she could see exactly
how long it was before her medications began to work and
wear off. P08 similarly needed a tool that would measure
exactly how bad his symptoms were in quantifiable terms:
"I don’t want it to just be oh are you shaking or not shak-
ing, I want to know how much". However, participants also
needed to be able to capture contextual information about
their symptoms. For example, P04’s notes for his clinician
contained rich contextual detail. He wrote as a note on his
phone to share with his doctor, "The tremors when left hand
is idle but not when [doing] a task, some shoulder or arm pain
but only when resting on my elbows."

Framing Data to Support a Problem-Solving Orientation. A
couple of participants suggested that how data was presented
to the user was important for supporting a problem-solving
orientation. While many participants, like P18, preferred raw
data that they could interpret themselves, participants like
P11 and P12-C stressed the importance of framing data about
decline in a way that highlighted actionable insights. P11 felt
that symptoms should only be tracked in context of control-
lable factors like exercise, saying, " . . . when you do a test like
[the finger tap test], it needs to be associated with . . . something
that they’re . . . either choosing to do or choosing not to do. . . . I
mean at least if they get worse and they’re doing it, you can
say, well, it would be worser. [sic]" P12-C had found that her
grandfather, who had PD, was more receptive to her help
when she helped him solve a problem rather than simply
pointing it out: ". . . we described it as, ’Here’s some new shoes,
but you can still be independent with them. I’m not like taking
away your independence. . . . I got you better shoes.’" P12-C felt
that framing bad news in terms of actionable insights was

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 6more conducive to problem-solving than simply presenting
data showing a "downward spiral".

In summary, participants saw self-tracking technologies as
tools that could help them plan for changes in their health
over the long and short term, reflecting a desire to use self-
tracking to support planful problem-solving type coping
strategies to respond to changes in their condition. In ad-
dition, some participants thought the framing of data was
important for nudging people towards positive coping strate-
gies in the face of changes in their health.

Self-Tracking to Escape ’Escape-Avoidance’ Coping
Several participants in our study spoke of the need for data
that they could not game or override. They worried that they
would unconsciously try to portray themselves as better
than they actually were when tracking their symptoms, and
wanted self-tracking systems that could objectively record
their symptoms. Some participants also hoped that self-tracking
data could help them convince someone close to them (a care
partner or the PwP themselves) to accept the reality of PD.
Participants’ desire for objective data about their symptoms
spoke to a desire to combat unconscious tendencies towards
denying the reality of their symptoms, or ’escape-avoidance
coping,’ which has been linked to lower quality of life in peo-
ple with PD [8]. Participants wanted objective self-tracking
systems to help them accept the reality of their current state.

Self-Tracking to Combat Tendencies Towards Denial. Symp-
toms like tremor can be captured meaningfully in three differ-
ent ways. One way is objective metrics, like accelerometer
data from a phone, or the results of a finger tap test. Another
way is with subjective metrics like a rating of how bad
the tremor is from mild to severe, and a third is with func-
tionalist metrics like a description of how specific tasks
and activities of daily life are impacted by the tremor. Some
participants worried that they would not accurately track
symptoms without an objective tracking system because
they would try to appear better than they were. Participants
did not always trust themselves to be able to offer represen-
tative behavior to their clinicians during the periodic clinical
exam. As P15 put it, "God bless my movement disorder neurol-
ogist, but she knows that I can game her. I just come in there
and I can just be perfect. . . . I will outperform what I normally
would." This concern, however, extended beyond clinic visits
to self-tracking systems. P08, concerned about "all kinds of
placebo effects in Parkinson’s research," wanted data "that I
couldn’t override". He wanted to be able to test tracking tools
to make sure he could not "game" them before he was willing
to trust them. P15 went further, rejecting any kind of metric
other than wearable sensors because, "Us PD patients, the
Parkies, we compensate all the time. That’s how you learn to

live, maintain a good lifestyle. So you know, you’re fighting
against human nature by doing" periodic, explicit data collec-
tion instead of using continuous sensor data. P16 felt that his
evaluations of not just a subjective symptom like pain but
even an outwardly measurable symptom like tremor would
be impacted by his surroundings. He said, ". . . my problem
is if it’s the dead of winter, I’m sitting in here and I’m in pain
and having a tremor, I’ll bet you that if you compare that same
tremor to the spring time when the birds are singing . . . I’ll bet
you my response is different." These statements suggest that
participants felt they could not rely on themselves to accu-
rately report their current condition, either to themselves or
to clinicians.

Some symptoms could not be tracked with objective metrics.
For instance, P09 experienced a symptom she called "tippi-
ness" that was different from her actual unsteadiness, but
rather "a strange perceptual thing that makes me feel unsteady,
even though I’m not actually unsteady." Several participants
also experienced cognitive symptoms like forgetfulness or a
sense of someone standing behind them, which one partici-
pant called "the presence" (P16). For these kinds of symptoms,
P01-C expressed concern that people’s willingness to track a
symptom would depend on how they were asked. P01-C wor-
ried that PwP’s reports of the symptoms they experienced
would be greatly impacted by context. Thinking about clinic
visits with her husband, she voiced concern that PwP would
not give clinicians accurate information if they perceived
their symptoms to be "bad":

". . . our doctor, who’s really good, she first asked, ’Are you hav-
ing hallucinations?’, and then after that, she said, ’Do you ever
feel like you just see something out of the corner of your eye,
but you don’t quite know what it is?’ And of course, if you
ask that question second, the person is gonna say, ’Oh, that’s
a precursor to hallucinations, hallucinations are bad. I don’t
have them, I’m going to say no to that question.’ Even if they
maybe have felt like there’s this weird sense of something on
the edge of the field of vision."—P01-C

In addition, participants were concerned that they would not
always be able to take the time to take objective measures
of their symptoms, even if the symptom could theoretically
be measured objectively. P15 gave the example of being "in
a meeting. . . I’m feeling unsteady. Am I going to stop and log
in the app and indicate—the answer of course is no. . . ". Partici-
pants were also not always aware of their symptoms: as P04
said, "sometimes I don’t even know, I look down and I see [the
tremor]. I don’t even know that it’s happening."

Because of the difficulty of logging symptoms at any time,
P11 wanted to be able to correlate her subjective sense of

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 7her symptoms with objective measures. As she described it:

". . . I think what would be an interesting thing to know is . . . do
they correlate. . . . So let’s say today I’m having a real big prob-
lem with tremor. So that I open up the app to a point where
every hour on the hour I get a prompt that says tremor, one,
two or three. . . . at the end of the day you could then pull that
up and put over it, you know, superimposed on it, what the
[objective] tremor measurement was."—P11

Dealing with Denial in Others. A couple of participants strug-
gled not just with forcing themselves to accept PD, but with
getting other people close to them to accept it. One partici-
pant, P04, hoped that symptom tracking systems could help
him get his spouse to accept his condition. P04 wanted his
spouse to complete the same finger tap test that P04 himself
performed so that he could compare his own data to that of
his spouse. P04 felt that his spouse was "still trying to ignore
it and he hasn’t gotten on board with this is a life changing
thing and we’re just going to have to accept it and move on."
He wanted to be able to record his data side by side with
his spouse’sâĂŤdata that could help him demonstrate to his
spouse the difference his symptoms made. From the other
side, P14-C wanted her husband, who had PD, to accept his
condition. She wanted data to prove to him that his medica-
tions made a difference to help him accept that he needed
treatment:

". . . he can’t see that there’s a difference when he takes his
meds. And so if I get him to take his meds and then, say, 20
minutes later do the test again, maybe he can see that there
is a change in the tremor test or the tap test. . . . And so maybe
I can actually show him with that, that he’s actually doing
better on the meds, which would be a huge help for me. . . . He
wouldn’t be quite so resistant to taking the meds."—P14-C

On the opposite end of the spectrum, participants did not
always want to admit to symptoms that they experienced,
and felt betrayed when their care partners kept track of those
symptoms and reported them to clinicians. P11 and P04 both
complained that their care partners liked to "tattle" (P11)
or "rat [them] out" (P04) at clinic visits. Anticipating this
reaction, other participants felt that care partners should be
able to track PwP’s symptoms independently of the PwP
themselves. P12-C, for instance, took care of her grandfather
with PD in conjunction with her whole family. She needed
a way for care partners to share notes with each other so
that their collective picture could help them all decide how
best to take care of the PwP, without his involvement at all.
P13, herself a PwP, likewise felt that care partners needed
tracking systems independent of PwP because sometimes

PwP "tend to get really belligerent and defensive" when con-
fronted with their symptoms.

In summary, some participants worried that they would cheat
their own self-tracking systems and present their symptoms
as better than they were if they did not have objective metrics
that they could not beat. Concerned that they could not take
the time to log objective metrics whenever they were experi-
encing symptoms, participants suggested that self-tracking
systems could help them learn to associate their subjective
feelings with objective metrics. Participants also saw value
in self-tracking systems for convincing others close to them
to accept the reality of PD, but some participants with PD
wanted the ability to escape tracking symptoms they did
not wish to admit to. As a result, some participants felt care
partners needed tools to track PwP’s symptoms completely
independently of the PwP themselves.

Ambiguous Symptoms and the Role of Care Partners
Participants were interested in using self-tracking technolo-
gies to help them cope with changes in their condition, but
they often struggled with symptoms that were unobservable
(in that PwP could not observe them themselves) or were
ambiguous in nature. In the first case, care partners could
play a clear role. However, in the last case, tensions some-
times arose between participants with PD and care partners,
because they could not always agree on whether change was
happening or what it meant. As P01-C put it, "I’d like to think
that it would be possible to be graceful about changes. But if
you’re confused about what changes are, that’s harder." We
describe each of these types of symptoms and the role of
care partners in tracking them.

Care Partners and Unobservable Symptoms. Participants some-
times wanted to track symptoms that they could not actually
observe themselves, such as sleep and soft speech. PwP some-
times speak very quietly without realizing it, as a result of
PD. As P07 put it, "When I think I’m talking normal . . . it’s not
the right normal." In these cases, some participants felt that
care partners could help track symptoms. For instance, par-
ticipants like P02 thought care partners were instrumental
in reporting sleep symptoms—he himself relied on his wife
to notice when he fell asleep while reading the newspaper,
and how long he had been asleep.

Care Partners and Ambiguous Symptoms. Participants fre-
quently wondered whether what they were experiencing
resulted from PD or from another cause. For instance, P02,
who had recently been hospitalized for a knee surgery, had
been experiencing increased tremor in his leg, and was un-
sure if his condition was changing or if his increased tremor
was temporary and related to his hospitalization. Partici-
pants determined if this type of symptom was due to PD

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 8either by waiting to see if it lasted (like P02) or by testing if
medication improved the symptom.

However, participants also sometimes struggled with distin-
guishing symptoms from everyday experience. For instance,
P02 explained how knowing that swallowing issues were a
symptom of PD would get ". . . in the back of your mind, and
at any time you have a difficulty swallowing or, say, you get
a coughing spell after drinking or something like that, you’re
gonna attribute it to the Parkinson’s when that may not be the
case at all."

Some participants felt care partners had a role to play in
identifying these ambiguous symptoms. For instance, P15
cared a great deal about data validity in tracking his symp-
toms, and saw his care partner as a way to validate data that
could not be gathered objectively. He said, ". . . I think if you
. . . say ’I felt forgetful today’ and the caregiver can say yes or
no, it validates the data." However, asking care partners to
track symptoms was not straightforward, in part because
PwP and care partners sometimes disputed whether some-
thing was a symptom at all. As P11 put it, "Here’s the thing.
My husband will say to me that he thinks that I am forgetful
or whatever, and I looked at him and I’m like, are you kidding
me? You say that because I have Parkinson’s. Am I allowed to
tell him that because he’s older?" Care partners also worried
about sorting symptoms out from everyday life. P01-C, for
instance, observed that her husband had been having occa-
sional difficulty parking, and could not tell if it was from
PD or just his usual parking style. "Then from the outside,
then I think, ’Well, maybe that’s a symptom.’ Or maybe that’s
just his personality. . . . How would I know? I’m not inside his
skin. . . . You can always come up with rational explanations
for slightly odd stuff, so when does it become a symptom?"

Care Partners in a Self-Tracking System
Participants had mixed views on whether care partners should
be users of self-tracking systems for PD. Some participants
wanted care partner participation within the self-tracking
system, like P04, whose desire to compare his finger tap test
data with his spouse’s was discussed earlier, and P11, who
thought it was valuable to be able to invite her care partner to
help her track specific symptoms like sleep. However, other
participants felt that care partner involvement should hap-
pen through face-to-face conversations rather than through
a "machine cold" (P18) self-tracking system. Even P15, who
thought care partners could act as guarantors of data valid-
ity, felt that he would "not necessarily be happy" to find that
his care partner was tracking his symptoms without talk-
ing to him about it face to face. As described earlier, some
participants (P13, P12-C) also hoped for symptom tracking
systems just for care partners. Finally, some care partners

did not want to involve themselves in symptom tracking at
all, like P08-C, who said tracking her husband’s symptoms
"feels really mommyish".

In summary, participants struggled with how to understand
changes in their condition and symptoms when they were
not sure exactly what the symptoms were. Participants were
open to the involvement of care partners in tracking symp-
toms that PwP could not observe themselves, and to go by
the test of time to determine whether symptoms of unclear
cause were attributable to PD. However, when it came to am-
biguous symptoms that were hard to distinguish from every-
day experience, tension arose between participants with PD
and care partners over what constituted a symptom. Perhaps
relatedly, participants generally felt that care partner involve-
ment should happen interpersonally rather than through a
symptom tracker, or that care partners should have their
own independent systems to track the PwP’s symptoms.

5 DISCUSSION
Our findings illustrate how self-tracking technologies can
play a central role in helping people with PD, a progressive
disease, cope with changes in their condition. Self-tracking
tools can help people plan for their decline and approach
it with positive coping strategies. In addition, by including
objective measures of symptoms, self-tracking tools can help
people combat their own unconscious tendencies towards
avoidance and face the reality of their condition. While other
work has examined how to instruct users in positive coping
strategies [84], our goal is not to prescribe any particular
coping strategy to PwP, especially since strategies like avoid-
ance and denial can at times be adaptive [38, 39], and people
may need to adapt their coping strategies over time and
changing contexts [22, 38]. Instead, our findings shed light
on how self-tracking technologies can be designed to help
people face changes in their condition with problem-solving
strategies and regulate their own unconscious attempts at
avoidance. In addition, our findings highlight the tension
that can arise between PwP and their care partners over the
ambiguous symptoms that are part of life with PD. Other
work has discussed the need for self-care technologies to
support mundane activities like medication taking, exercise,
and collaboration between PwP and care partners [66, 67].
Our findings build on this literature and yield several insights
for the design of self-tracking tools for PD.

Designing to Support Planful Problem-Solving
Although the rate of PD progression is highly unpredictable,
participants saw self-tracking systems as tools to help them
plan as best as they were able, and to resolve issues with their
medications as their condition changed. These sentiments
reflected a desire for self-tracking tools that would support

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 9planful problem-solving coping strategies. To support these
uses, PwP need self-tracking systems that allow them to
flexibly track different types of data and review it for highly
customized timeframes. Since PD progression can happen
over a long term, PwP need systems that impose a low user
burden. Because PwP wanted to use tracking technologies
to plan for decline, researchers should also explore to what
extent tracking technologies for PD and other progressive
diseases should support prediction of decline, as well as
how the framing of self-tracking data can help people adopt
positive coping strategies to face changes in their condition.

Create flexible tracking systems. Participants set out to study
their condition not just in terms of the symptoms they expe-
rienced, but in terms of the contextual factors which affected
those symptoms, such as treatment and behavioral and envi-
ronmental factors. To identify factors that affect their symp-
toms, PwP and care partners need systems that allow them
to define and track a variety of symptoms and contextual
factors. In this respect, self-tracking systems for PD should
resemble other self-tracking systems in the literature, such
as OmniTrack [36] and Health Mashups [5], which allow
users to track whatever is meaningful to them and identify
correlations.

Participants needed systems that could help them track over
both the very short term (e.g., a matter of hours to track
medication effect) and the very long term (e.g., over years
to track progression). This finding implies that self-tracking
systems must allow data retrieval over customizable time-
frames. Since participants wanted to communicate with clini-
cians about their medication schedules, self-tracking systems
should also be designed to facilitate patient-clinician commu-
nication, as has been examined in other work [60, 83, 93, 94,
97]. Researchers should additionally explore ways to make
the burden of self-tracking bearable over the long term. Past
work has found that self-trackers in other contexts abandon
self-tracking when it is too burdensome [11], and that PwP
in particular need low-burden self-tracking systems where
data is easy to enter at any convenient time [92]. Researchers
have also found that self-tracking can have the unintended
effect of forcing people to dwell on the depressing fact of
their illness [1], a finding voiced by one of our participants as
well (P10), as described earlier. One approach researchers can
explore to make self-tracking manageable over the long term
is to establish the minimum amount of data needed to mean-
ingfully track progression, either in terms of the amount of
data collected or the time interval at which it is collected,
and ask users to meet only this minimum standard over the
long term (e.g., asking users to check in intermittently every
few months), to reduce the burden of self-tracking over time.
However, this approach comes with several open questions,

including how often people must measure their symptoms
for progression to be detectable and how the design of inter-
mittent tracking systems can help people stay engaged over
the long term. Additionally, since PwP may need changing
support over time [67] and the pace of PD progression is not
easy to predict, the minimum meaningful tracking interval
may change over time. More work must be done to under-
stand how to design systems to best support intermittent
tracking.

Explore Design for Predicting Decline. Participants wanted to
track their symptoms in part to predict when their condition
would worsen. This finding yields several implications. First,
since PD symptoms vary a great deal over time and pro-
gression can be difficult to predict, PD self-tracking systems
should communicate to users the limitations of their ability
to detect trends. This is especially important because the high
level of noise and variability in PD symptoms may contradict
general assumptions about the ability of self-tracking sys-
tems to reliably detect trends. If knowledge about PD symp-
tom progression advances to the point where systems can
accurately predict decline, researchers must consider when
and how to present this information to users. Since framing
of self-tracking data can influence users’ self-perception [10],
presentation of information about disease progression must
be thoughtfully designed so as not to foster a sense of help-
lessness and depression. In addition, our findings suggest
that the optimal design will vary based on individual’s val-
ues, disease stage, and family situation. For instance, some
PwP are likely to prefer getting actionable recommenda-
tions alongside or instead of a prediction about decline. For
these users, researchers must carefully consider how to pre-
vent contradictory or unhelpful recommendations [5, 77],
especially as symptoms can fluctuate rapidly, and a recom-
mendation based on symptom intensity one day may not
apply the following day. Additionally, users might reject
system-generated suggestions if they do not agree with the
system’s assessment of their current state and abilities. As an
alternative approach, some users might prefer that systems
alert family members or clinicians to changes in the PwP’s
condition, especially if the PwP is highly dependent on care
partners, while other users might find this function intrusive.
Researchers must find ways to design systems congruent
with PwP’s individual values.

Designing to Help Avoid Escape-Avoidance Coping
Researchers have found in other health contexts that track-
ing can arouse feelings of anxiety [35, 76, 91]. Our findings
show that people living with progressive diseases like PD
can feel reluctance to log progression in symptoms. However,
rather than simply avoiding tracking, participants feared that
they might intentionally log data that misrepresented their

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 10condition. Participants valued objective symptom measures
to help them honestly confront PD progression.

The nature of data has been shown to matter for ease of
logging and interpretation in other health contexts (e.g.,
[13, 16, 29, 86]). Our findings suggest that data type also
matters in the context of progressive diseases like PD, where
people grapple with their own unconscious desires to por-
tray themselves in the rosiest light, both to clinicians and
to themselves. Since facing up to current disease state is
an important part of what PwP see as successful life with
the disease [31], it is important to design self-tracking tech-
nologies to help people confront the inevitable decline in
their condition. To help PwP and care partners combat their
own tendencies towards avoidance, self-tracking technolo-
gies for PD should incorporate objective metrics wherever
possible. However, even the most dedicated self-trackers will
sometimes encounter situations where they are not able to
take objective measures of their symptoms, either because
the time is not convenient or because there is no possible
objective metric (e.g., for symptoms like hallucinations or
P09’s "tippiness"). For the first case, tracking systems may be
able to help PwP log symptoms accurately by helping them
understand the connection between their subjective sense of
a symptom and the objective measurement of a symptom, as
suggested by P11 in our findings. This finding underscores
the importance of ongoing research in HCI and health infor-
matics to develop methods for passive, continuous capture
of different symptoms through mobile phones and wearable
technologies (e.g., [2, 27, 42, 43, 53, 64], and others), so that
users can capture data about their symptoms without inter-
rupting their day. For the second case, researchers should
explore ways to help people achieve consistency in subjective
symptom tracking. One direction researchers can explore is
to investigate how to assist users in creating scale anchors
that make sense to them. Work in self-experimentation has
found that users worry about their ability to be consistent
in evaluating symptoms [34], and desire highly customized
ways to record symptoms in ways that make sense to them
[33]. Our findings suggest that helping users find ways to
record symptoms in ways they feel they can use consistently
is important in the context of progressive disease as well, so
that users can hold themselves to an internally consistent rat-
ing system as their symptoms change over time. Additionally,
some symptoms, like tremor, can be recorded in different
ways, and users might find it more valuable or convenient
to log symptoms in different ways at different times. For
instance, users might find it more convenient to log a subjec-
tive rating of a tremor at work, and more valuable to log an
objective metric at home. Alternatively, users may want to
capture additional contextual detail about their symptoms,

beyond a simple objective marker, to communicate with clin-
icians about their health. Accordingly, researchers should
explore ways of accommodating multiple types of data for
the same symptom. Different data types can pose challenges
not just for system designers, but also for users in reflecting
back over their data. More work must be done to under-
stand if different data types for the same symptom should be
merged, for example, or if they should be separated within
the interface of a self-tracking system.

Designing for Ambiguous Symptoms and Care
Partners
Although care partners are important in any health context,
they are especially important in the context of progressive,
debilitating conditions like PD [66], where people know that
their condition will deteriorate and they will become increas-
ingly dependent on others. We found that while PwP and
care partners were aware of this reality, there was no con-
sensus on exactly what role care partners should assume
in symptom tracking. Building on findings that care part-
ners and patients sometimes experience conflict in managing
chronic disease [6, 91] and recommendations that systems
for self-care be designed to maximize the patientâĂŹs auton-
omy [69], we suggest that self-tracking systems for PD be
designed to give PwP choice over how to involve their care
partners in their self-tracking. PwP should be able to choose
whether care partners have any access to their self-tracking
systems at all, whether they have viewing access, or whether
they can add data themselves. If the latter, PwP should be
able to choose exactly what kinds of data care partners can
enter. If care partners are permitted to jointly track symp-
toms with PwP, then designers must explore ways to support
merged data streams, as discussed by Pina et al. in the context
of family tracking of chronic disease [74]. Researchers and
designers of self-tracking systems for PD must also explore
how the role of the caregiver may evolve over time, as the
PwP’s condition changes [66, 69].

Our findings also illustrated how PwPs and care partners
struggled to disambiguate symptoms from normal occur-
rences. To help PwP and caregivers resolve ambiguity over
what constitutes a symptom, researchers should explore
ways to facilitate shared reflection over tracked data between
PwP and care partners to help them jointly determine what
part of their experience is due to the disease and what part
of their experience is just everyday life. Shared reflection
has been found to help people glean new insights from data
[26] and been recommended as a way for care partners and
patients to manage asymmetric values [6].

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 11However, when symptoms are hard to differentiate from
noise, researchers and designers must recognize that en-
couraging PwP and care partners to track ambiguous symp-
toms might lead people to track things they would not oth-
erwise consider symptoms. This may especially be the case
in the context of a progressive disease, where users are al-
ready on the lookout for new and worse symptoms. In addi-
tion, simple awareness of symptoms could make symptoms
worse [69, 92]. Researchers must explore how to design self-
tracking symptoms for progressive diseases so that they do
not make chance occurrences seem like symptoms, thereby
inadvertently creating the symptoms they seek to merely
record. Both intermittent tracking, suggested earlier as a
strategy to minimize user burden, and objective metrics may
help PwP and care partners differentiate signal from noise.
If tracking check-ins are spaced far enough apart, users have
time to forget possible symptoms that do not recur, helping
them identify patterns and distinguish disease symptoms
from chance occurrences. Passive continuous monitoring,
where available, may also help users distinguish symptoms
from noise if they feel that the system is gathering data they
cannot influence.

6 LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Our study has three important limitations. First is the repre-
sentativeness of our sample, which was largely made up of
people in earlier stages of PD. In addition, we recruited in
part from populations already participating in self-tracking
research. Consequently, our sample population was likely
biased in favor of self-tracking. Although it is unclear exactly
how representative of the general PD population our sample
is, it is important to understand that some PwP see self-
tracking technologies as useful and valuable tools for coping
with changing health. Future work must be done to gain a
more representative picture of how self-tracking fits into
the needs of the PD population at large, and especially how
it supports people in more advanced stages of the disease.
Future work must also investigate how individual character-
istics like socio-economic status impact PwP’s self-tracking
needs, and should include the development and deployment
of self-tracking tools to gain further insight into the needs
of PwP. Second, care partners’ roles evolve over time, as
the PwP’s condition changes [66]. Because our study was
not longitudinal, we were unable to examine how people’s
attitudes towards the role of care partners in self-tracking
systems might change as the PwP’s condition changed. Fu-
ture work must be done to understand this evolution. Third,
we interviewed PwP and their care partners, but not clini-
cians in this study. Since our findings suggested that PwP
want self-tracking technologies to facilitate communication
with clinicians, future work should include research done

with clinicians to understand their communication needs
and perspectives.

7 CONCLUSION
As PD progresses, PwP and the care partners who share their
lives must learn to cope with the PwP’s changing condi-
tion. However, not all coping strategies are created equal,
and positive coping strategies yield a better quality of life
than avoidance coping strategies [8]. We illustrate how self-
tracking technologies can help people with PD and their care
partners pursue positive coping strategies, and combat their
own tendencies towards denial as the disease progresses. We
also show that care partners can be instrumental in symp-
tom tracking, but that tensions can arise between PwP and
care partners when symptoms are ambiguous. Accordingly,
researchers and designers should create flexible self-tracking
systems for PD that incorporate objective metrics of symp-
toms wherever possible, and allow PwP to determine for
themselves the role of their care partners in helping them
track their symptoms. Thoughtful design of self-tracking
systems for PD has the potential to help PwP better manage
their illness and achieve higher quality of life.

8 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank our participants and participants in the mPower
study. Thanks also to our partners at the Michael J. Fox
Foundation and the members and organizers of the boxing
class who for their help in recruiting participants, and the
Robert Wood Johnson Foundation for funding this work. We
thank others at Sage Bionetworks who helped with this work:
Vanessa Barone, Christine Suver, Thanneer Perumal, Dan
Webster, Stockard Simone, and others who helped make this
work possible.

REFERENCES
[1] Jessica S. Ancker, Holly O. Witteman, Baria Hafeez, Thierry
Provencher, Mary Van De Graaf, and Esther Wei. 2015.
"You get
reminded you’re a sick person": Personal data tracking and patients
with multiple chronic conditions. Journal of Medical Internet Research
17, 8 (2015). https://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.4209

[2] Siddharth Arora, Vinayak Venkataraman, Andong Zhan, S. Donohue,
K. M. Biglan, E. Ray Dorsey, and M. A. Little. 2015. Detecting and
monitoring the symptoms of Parkinson’s disease using smartphones:
A pilot study. Parkinsonism and Related Disorders 21 (2015), 650–653.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.parkreldis.2015.02.026

[3] Amid Ayobi, Paul Marshall, Anna Cox, and Yunan Chen. 2017. Quanti-
fying the body and caring for the mind: Understanding self-tracking in
multiple sclerosis. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
6889–6901. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025869

[4] Jakob E. Bardram, Mads Frost, Károly Szántó, and Gabriela Marcu.
2012. The MONARCA self-assessment system. In Proceedings of the
2nd ACM SIGHIT symposium on International health informatics - IHI
’12. 21. https://doi.org/10.1145/2110363.2110370

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 12[5] Frank Bentley, Konrad Tollmar, Peter Stephenson, Laura Levy, Brian
Jones, Scott Robertson, Ed Price, Richard Catrambone, and Jeff Wil-
son. 2013. Health Mashups: Presenting Statistical Patterns between
Wellbeing Data and Context in Natural Language to Promote Behav-
ior Change. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 20, 5
(2013), 1–27. https://doi.org/10.1145/2503823

[6] Andrew B. L. Berry, Catherine Lim, Andrea L. Hartzler, Tad Hirsch,
Edward H. Wagner, Evette Ludman, and James D. Ralston. 2017. How
Values Shape Collaboration Between Patients with Multiple Chronic
Conditions and Spousal Caregivers. In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’17. 5257–
5270. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025923

[7] S. Bostantjopoulou, Zoe Katsarou, C. Karakasis, E. Peitsidou, D. Milioni,
and N. Rossopoulos. 2013. Evaluation of non-motor symptoms in
Parkinson’s Disease: An underestimated necessity. Hippokratia 17, 3
(2013), 214–219.

[8] R. S. Bucks, K. E. Cruise, T. C. Skinner, A. M. Loftus, R. A. Barker, and
M. G. Thomas. 2011. Coping processes and health-related quality of
life in Parkinson’s disease. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry
26, 3 (2011), 247–255. https://doi.org/10.1002/gps.2520

[9] K. Ray Chaudhuri, Per Odin, Angelo Antonini, and Pablo Martinez-
Martin. 2011. Parkinson’s disease: The non-motor issues. Parkinsonism
and Related Disorders 17, 10 (2011), 717–723. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
parkreldis.2011.02.018

[10] Eun Kyoung Choe, Bongshin Lee, Sean Munson, Wanda Pratt, and
Julie A Kientz. 2013.
Persuasive performance feedback: the ef-
fect of framing on self-efficacy.. In American Medical Informat-
ics Association Annual Symposium proceedings, Vol. 2013. 825–
33.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24551378{%}5Cnhttp://
www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=PMC3900219

[11] Eun Kyoung Choe, Nicole B. Lee, Bongshin Lee, Wanda Pratt, and
Julie A. Kientz. 2014. Understanding quantified-selfers’ practices in
collecting and exploring personal data. In Proceedings of the 32nd
annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems (CHI
’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1143–1152. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2556288.2557372

[12] Kelvin L. Chou. 2018. Clinical Manifestations of Parkinson Disease. In
UpToDate, Howard I. Hurtig and April F. Eichler (Eds.). Wolters Kluwer,
Waltham, MA. https://doi.org/10.1128/JCM.01360-10

[13] Chia-Fang Chung, Elena Agapie, Jessica Schroeder, Sonali R. Mishra,
James Fogarty, and Sean A Munson. 2017. When personal tracking
becomes social: Examining the use of Instagram for healthy eating. In
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1674–1687. https://doi.
org/10.1145/3025453.3025747

[14] Chia-Fang Chung, Kristin Dew, Allison Cole, Jasmine Zia, James
Fogarty, Julie A. Kientz, and Sean A. Munson. 2016. Boundary ne-
gotiating artifacts in personal informatics: Patient-provider collabo-
ration with Patient-generated data. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & Social Com-
puting (CSCW ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 770–786.
https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819926

[15] Juliet Corbin and Anselm Strauss. 1990. Grounded Theory Research:
Procedures, Canons and Evaluative Criteria. Qualitative Sociology 13,
1 (1990), 3–21. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00988593

[16] Felicia Cordeiro, Elizabeth Bales, Erin Cherry, and James Fogarty. 2015.
Rethinking the Mobile Food Journal. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’15.
3207–3216. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702154

[17] Ana Correia de Barros, João Cevada, Àngels Bayés, Sheila Alcaine, and
Berta Mestre. 2013. User-centred Design of a Mobile Self-management

Solution for Parkinson’s Disease. In International Conference on Mobile
and Ubiquitous Multimedia (MUM). 23:1–23:10. https://doi.org/10.
1145/2541831.2541839

[18] Daniel A. Epstein, Nicole B. Lee, Jennifer H. Kang, Elena Agapie, Jessica
Schroeder, Laura R. Pina, James Fogarty, Julie A. Kientz, and Sean A.
Munson. 2017. Examining Menstrual Tracking to Inform the Design
of Personal Informatics Tools. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2017). ACM, New York,
NY, USA. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025635

[19] Sergio Felipe, Aneesha Singh, Caroline Bradley, Amanda Cdec
Williams, and Nadia Bianchi-Berthouze. 2015. Roles for personal
informatics in chronic pain. In 9th International Conference on Perva-
sive Computing Technologies for Healthcare. 161–168. https://doi.org/
10.4108/icst.pervasivehealth.2015.259501

[20] S Folkman and R S Lazarus. 1985. If it changes it must be a process.
Journal of personality and social psychology 48, 1 (1985), 150–170.
[21] Susan Folkman and Richard S. Lazarus. 1988. The ways of coping ques-
tionnaire: Manual, Instrument, Scoring Guide. Consulting Psychologists
Press, Inc.

[22] Leslie D. Frazier. 2002. Stability and Change in Patterns of Coping with
Parkinson’s Disease. The international journal of aging and human
development 55, 3 (2002), 207–231. https://doi.org/10.1166/jnn.20
[23] Brook Galna, Dan Jackson, Guy Schofield, Roisin McNaney, Mary
Webster, Gillian Barry, Dadirayi Mhiripiri, Madeline Balaam, Patrick
Olivier, and Lynn Rochester. 2014. Retraining function in people with
Parkinson’s disease using the Microsoft kinect: Game design and pilot
testing. Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation 11, 1 (2014),
no pagination. https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-0003-11-60

[24] Christopher G. Goetz, Stanley Fahn, Pablo Martinez-Martin, Werner
Poewe, Cristina Sampaio, Glenn T. Stebbins, Matthew B. Stern, Bar-
bara C. Tilley, Richard Dodel, Bruno Dubois, Robert Holloway, Joseph
Jankovic, Jaime Kulisevsky, Anthony E. Lang, Andrew Lees, Sue Leur-
gans, Peter A. LeWitt, David Nyenhuis, C. Warren Olanow, Olivier
Rascol, Anette Schrag, Jeanne A. Teresi, Jacobus J. Van Hilten, and
Nancy LaPelle. 2007. Movement disorder society-sponsored revision
of the unified Parkinson’s disease rating scale (MDS-UPDRS): Process,
format, and clinimetric testing plan. Movement Disorders 22, 1 (2007),
41–47. https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.21198

[25] A. M. Gotham, R. G. Brown, and C. D. Marsden. 1986. Depression in
Parkinson’s disease: A quantitative and qualitative analysis. Journal
of Neurology Neurosurgery and Psychiatry 49, 4 (1986), 381–389. https:
//doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.49.4.381

[26] Lisa Graham, Anthony Tang, and Carman Neustaedter. 2016. Help me
help you: Shared reflection for personal data. In Proceedings of the 19th
International Conference on Supporting Group Work (GROUP ’16). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 99–109. https://doi.org/10.1145/2957276.2957293
arXiv:arXiv:1011.1669v3

[27] K. Grandez, P. Bustamante, G. Solas, I. Gurutzeaga, and A. García-
Alonso. 2009. Wearable wireless sensor for the gait monitorization
of Parkinsonian patients. In 2009 16th IEEE International Conference
on Electronics, Circuits and Systems, ICECS 2009. 215–218. https://doi.
org/10.1109/ICECS.2009.5410974

[28] Anita Haahr, Marit Kirkevold, Elisabeth O.C. Hall, and Karen Øster-
gaard. 2011. Living with advanced Parkinson’s disease: A constant
struggle with unpredictability. Journal of Advanced Nursing 67, 2
(2011), 408–417. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2648.2010.05459.x
[29] Matthew K. Hong, Udaya Lakshmi, Thomas A. Olson, and Lauren
Wilcox. 2018. Visual ODLs: Co-Designing Patient-Generated Observa-
tions of Daily Living to Support Data-Driven Conversations in Pedi-
atric Care. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems - CHI ’18. 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.
3174050

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 13[30] Abdelilah Jilbab, Achraf Benba, and Ahmed Hammouch. 2017. Quan-
International Journal of
https://doi.org/10.1007/

tification system of Parkinson’s disease.
Speech Technology 20, 1 (2017), 143–150.
s10772-016-9394-9

[31] Mi Young Kang and Caroline Ellis-Hill. 2015. How do people live life
successfully with Parkinson’s disease? Journal of Clinical Nursing 24,
15-16 (2015), 2314–2322. https://doi.org/10.1111/jocn.12819

[32] Ravi Karkar, Rafal Kocielnik, Xiaoyi Zhang, James Fogarty, George N
Ioannou, Sean A Munson, and Jasmine Zia. 2018. Beacon: Designing a
Portable Device for Self-Administering a Measure of Critical Flicker
Frequency. Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies
2, 3 (2018).

[33] Ravi Karkar, Jessica Schroeder, Daniel A Epstein, Laura R Pina, Jef-
frey Scofield, James Fogarty, Julie A Kientz, Sean A Munson, Roger
Vilardaga, and Jasmine Zia. 2017. TummyTrials: A Feasibility Study of
Using Self-Experimentation to Detect Individualized Food Triggers. In
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems (CHI 2017). 6850–6863. https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025480
[34] Ravi Karkar, Jasmine Zia, Roger Vilardaga, Sonali R. Mishra, James
Fogarty, Sean A. Munson, and Julie A. Kientz. 2016. A framework for
self-experimentation in personalized health. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association 23, 3 (2016), 440–448. https://doi.org/
10.1093/jamia/ocv150

[35] Julie A Kientz, Rosa I Arriaga, Marshini Chetty, Gillian R Hayes, Jah-
meilah Richardson, Shwetak N Patel, Gregory D Abowd, and Street
Nw. 2007. Grow and Know : Understanding Record-Keeping Needs
for Tracking the Development of Young Children. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
’07). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1351–1360. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
urology.2010.11.034

[36] Young-Ho Kim, Jae Ho Jeon, Bongshin Lee, Eun Kyoung Choe, and
Jinwook Seo. 2017. OmniTrack: A Flexible Self-Tracking Approach
Leveraging Semi-Automated Tracking. Proceedings of the ACM on
Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies 1, 3 (2017),
1–28. https://doi.org/10.1145/3130930

[37] Rashmi Lakshminarayana, Duolao Wang, David Burn, K Ray Chaud-
huri, Clare Galtrey, Natalie Valle Guzman, Bruce Hellman, Ben James,
Suvankar Pal, Jon Stamford, Malcolm Steiger, R W Stott, James Teo,
Roger A Barker, and Emma Wang. 2016. Using a smartphone-based
self-management platform to support medication adherence and
clinical consultation in Parkinson’s disease. Nature Partner Jour-
nals: Parkinson’s Disease May (2016), 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41531-016-0003-z

[38] Richard S. Lazarus. 1993. Coping Theory and Research: Past, Present,

and Future. Psychosomatic Medicine 55, 3 (1993), 234–247.

[39] James L. Levenson, Asha Mishra, Robert M. Hamer, and Andrea
Hastillo. 1989. Denial and medical outcome in unstable angina. Psy-
chosomatic Medicine 51, 1 (1989), 27–35.

[40] Jacki Liddle, David Ireland, Simon J. McBride, Sandra G. Brauer,
Leanne M. Hall, Hang Ding, Mohan Karunanithi, Paul W. Hodges,
Deborah Theodoros, Peter A. Silburn, and Helen J. Chenery. 2014.
Measuring the lifespace of people with parkinson’s disease using smart-
phones: Proof of principle. Journal of Medical Internet Research 16, 3
(2014). https://doi.org/10.2196/mhealth.2799

[41] Ting-Yang Lin, Chung-Hung Hsieh, and Jiann-Der Lee. 2013. A Kinect-
Based System for Physical Rehabilitation: Utilizing Tai Chi Exercises
to Improve Movement Disorders in Patients with Balance Ability.. In
Proceedings of the 2013 7th Asia Modelling Symposium (AMS ’13). IEEE
Computer Society, Washington, DC, 149–153. https://doi.org/DOI=
http://dx.doi.org.offcampus.lib.washington.edu/10.1109/AMS.2013.29
[42] Michael A. Lones, Jane E. Alty, Jeremy Cosgrove, Philippa Duggan-
Carter, Stuart Jamieson, Rebecca F. Naylor, Andrew J. Turner, and

Stephen L. Smith. 2017. A New Evolutionary Algorithm-Based Home
Monitoring Device for Parkinson’s Dyskinesia. Journal of Medical
Systems 41, 176 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-017-0811-7
[43] Jiaxin Ma, Kenichi Kameyama, and Makoto Nakagawa. 2017. Opti-
mizing Gait Parameters and Insole Sensor Positioning for Parkinson’s
Disease Assessment. In Proceedings of the 2017 4th International Confer-
ence on Biomedical and Bioinformatics Engineering (ICBBE 2017). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1145/3168776.3168780

[44] Brigid MacCarthy and Richard Brown. 1989. Psychosocial Factors in
Parkinson’s Disease. British Journal of Clinical Psychology 28, 1 (1989),
41–52. https://doi.org/10.1166/jnn.20

[45] Haley MacLeod, Anthony Tang, and Sheelagh Carpendale. 2013. Per-
sonal informatics in chronic illness management. In Proceedings of
Graphics Interface 2013 (GI ’13). Canadian Information Processing So-
ciety, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 149–156. http://hcitang.org/papers/
2013-gi2013-personal-informatics.pdf

[46] Lena Mamykina, Elizabeth M Heitkemper, Arlene M Smaldone, Rita
Kukafka, Patricia G Davidson, Elizabeth D Mynatt, Andrea Cassells, N
Jonathan, George Hripcsak, United States, United States, West Chester,
United States, United States, and United States. 2017. Personal discov-
ery in diabetes self-management: Discovering cause and effect using
self-monitoring data. Journal of Biomedical Informatics 76 (2017), 1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbi.2017.09.013.Personal

[47] Lena Mamykina and Andrew D. Miller. 2010. Constructing identities
through storytelling in diabetes management. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’10).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1203–1212. https://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.
1753507

[48] Lena Mamykina, Elizabeth Mynatt, Patricia Davidson, and David
Greenblatt. 2008. MAHI: Investigation of social scaffolding for re-
flective thinking in diabetes management. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’08). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 477–486. https://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357131
[49] C. Marras, J. C. Beck, J. H. Bower, E. Roberts, B Ritz, G. W. Ross, R. D. Ab-
bott, R. Savica, S. K. Van Den Eeden, A. W. Willis, and CM Tanner. 2018.
Prevalence of Parkinson’s disease across North America. npj Parkin-
son’s Disease 4, 1 (2018), 21. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41531-018-0058-0
[50] Mark Matthews, Elizabeth Murnane, and Jaime Snyder. 2017. Quantify-
ing the Changeable Self: The Role of Self-Tracking in Coming to Terms
With and Managing Bipolar Disorder. Human-Computer Interaction 32,
5-6 (2017), 413–446. https://doi.org/10.1080/07370024.2017.1294983

[51] Mark Matthews, Elizabeth Murnane, Jaime Snyder, Shion Guha, Pa-
mara Chang, Gavin Doherty, and Geri Gay. 2017. The double-edged
sword: A mixed methods study of the interplay between bipolar dis-
order and technology use. Computers in Human Behavior 75 (2017),
288–300. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2017.05.009

[52] Elina Mattila, Ilkka Korhonen, Jukka H. Salminen, Aino Ahtinen, Esa
Koskinen, Antti Särelä, Juha Pärkkä, and Raimo Lappalainen. 2010.
Empowering citizens for well-being and chronic disease management
with wellness diary. IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in
Biomedicine 14, 2 (2010), 456–463. https://doi.org/10.1109/TITB.2009.
2037751

[53] Sinziana Mazilu, Ulf Blanke, Daniel Roggen, Gerhard Tr, Eran Gazit,
and Jeffrey H Hausdorff. 2013. Engineers Meet Clinicians: Aug-
mented Parkinson’s Disease Patients to Gather Information for Gait
Rehabilitation. In 4th Augmented Human International Conference. 4.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2459236.2459257

[54] Mollie McKillop, Lena Mamykina, and Noémie Elhadad. 2018. Design-
ing in the Dark. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’18. 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3173574.3174139

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 14[55] Roisin McNaney, Nick Miller, Patrick Olivier, Stephen Lindsay, Karim
Ladha, Cassim Ladha, Guy Schofield, Thomas Ploetz, Nils Hammerla,
Daniel Jackson, and Richard Walker. 2011. Cueing for drooling in
Parkinson’s disease. In Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on
Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11. 619. https://doi.org/10.
1145/1978942.1979030

[56] Roisin McNaney, Patrick Olivier, Madeline Balaam, Amey Holden,
Guy Schofield, Daniel Jackson, Mary Webster, Brook Galna, Gillian
Barry, and Lynn Rochester. 2015. Designing for and with People
with Parkinson’s. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’15. 501–510. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702310

[57] Roisin McNaney, Mohammad Othman, Dan Richardson, Paul Dunphy,
Telmo Amaral, Nick Miller, Helen Stringer, Patrick Olivier, and John
Vines. 2016. Speeching: Mobile Crowdsourced Speech Assessment to
Support Self-Monitoring and Management for People with Parkinson’s.
In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems. 4464–4476. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858321
[58] Roisin McNaney, John Vines, Daniel Roggen, Madeline Balaam, Pengfei
Zhang, Ivan Poliakov, and Patrick Olivier. 2014. Exploring the ac-
ceptability of google glass as an everyday assistive device for peo-
ple with parkinson’s. In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM confer-
ence on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’14. 2551–2554.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557092

[59] Mevludin Memedi, Jerker Westin, Dag Nyholm, Mark Dougherty, and
Torgny Groth. 2011. A web application for follow-up of results from a
mobile device test battery for Parkinson’s disease patients. Computer
Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 104, 2 (2011), 219–226. https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2011.07.017

[60] Helena M. Mentis, Anita Komlodi, Katrina Schrader, Michael Phipps,
Ann Gruber-Baldini, Karen Yarbrough, and Lisa Shulman. 2017. Craft-
ing a view of self-tracking data in the clinical visit. In Proceedings of
the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 5800–5812. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3025453.3025589

[61] National Health Service. 2016. Symptoms: Parkinson’s Disease.
[62] National Institutes of Health. 2010. Parkinson’s Disease Fact Sheet.
October (2010), 1–2. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61393-3
[63] Elias Chaibub Neto, Brian M. Bot, Thanneer Perumal, Larsson Omberg,
Justin Guinney, Mike Kellen, Arno Klein, Stephen H. Friend, and
Andrew D. Trister. 2016. Personalized Hypothesis Tests for De-
tecting Medication Response in Parkinson Disease Patients Using
iPhone Sensor Data. Biocomputing 2016 21 (2016), 273–284. https:
//doi.org/10.1142/9789814749411_0026

[64] Elias Chaibub Neto, Thanneer M Perumal, Abhishek Pratap, Brian M
Bot, Lara Mangravite, and Larsson Omberg. 2017. On the analysis of
personalized medication response and classification of case vs control
patients in mobile health studies: the mPower case study. arXiv preprint
June (2017). arXiv:1706.09574 http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.09574
[65] Francisco Nunes, Tariq Andersen, and Geraldine Fitzpatrick. 2017. The
agency of patients and carers in medical care and self-care technolo-
gies for interacting with doctors. Health Informatics Journal (2017),
146045821771205. https://doi.org/10.1177/1460458217712054

[66] Francisco Nunes and Geraldine Fitzpatrick. 2015. Self-Care Technolo-
gies and Collaboration.
International Journal of Human-Computer
Interaction 31, 12 (2015), 869–881. https://doi.org/10.1080/10447318.
2015.1067498

[67] Francisco Nunes and Geraldine Fitzpatrick. 2018. Understanding the
Mundane Nature of Self-care : Ethnographic Accounts of People Living
with Parkinson’s. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’18). ACM, New York, NY, USA.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173976

[68] Francisco Nunes, Paula Alexandra Silva, João Cevada, Ana Correia
Barros, and Luís Teixeira. 2016. User interface design guidelines for
smartphone applications for people with Parkinson’s disease. Universal
Access in the Information Society 15, 4 (2016), 659–679. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10209-015-0440-1

[69] Francisco Nunes, Nervo Verdezoto, Geraldine Fitzpatrick, Morten Kyng,
Erik Grönvall, and Cristiano Storni. 2015. Self-Care Technologies in
HCI. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction 22, 6 (2015),
1–45. https://doi.org/10.1145/2803173

[70] Gennaro Pagano, Nicola Ferrara, and David J Brooks. 2016. Age at
onset and Parkinson disease phenotype. Neurology 86, 15 (2016), 1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000002461

[71] Michael Quinn Patton. 2015. Qualitative Research and Evaluation
Methods (4th ed.). Sage Publications, Inc., Los Angeles. 519–556 pages.
[72] Carla Pereira, Patrícia Macedo, and Rui Neves Madeira. 2015. Mo-
bile Integrated Assistance to Empower People Coping with Parkin-
son’s Disease. In Proceedings of the 17th International ACM SIGAC-
CESS Conference on Computers & Accessibility - ASSETS. 409–410.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2700648.2811394

[73] Clayton R. Pereira, Danilo R. Pereira, Francisco A. Silva, João P.
Masieiro, Silke A.T. Weber, Christian Hook, and João P. Papa. 2016. A
new computer vision-based approach to aid the diagnosis of Parkin-
son’s disease. Computer Methods and Programs in Biomedicine 136
(2016), 79–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cmpb.2016.08.005

[74] Laura R. Pina, Sang-Wha Sien, Teresa Ward, Jason C. Yip, Sean A.
Munson, James Fogarty, and Julie A. Kientz. 2017. From personal
informatics to family informatics. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Com-
puting (CSCW ’17). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2300–2315. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998362

[75] Tamara Pringsheim, Nathalie Jette, Alexandra Frolkis, and Thomas
D L Steeves. 2014. The prevalence of Parkinson’s disease: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. Movement Disorders 29, 13 (2014), 1583–1590.
https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.25945

[76] Stephen Purpura, Victoria Schwanda, Kaiton Williams, William Stubler,
and Phoebe Sengers. 2011. Fit4life: The design of a persuasive tech-
nology promoting healthy behavior and ideal weight. In Proceedings
of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems -
CHI ’11. 423. https://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979003

[77] Mashfiqui Rabbi, Min Hane Aung, Mi Zhang, and Tanzeem Choudhury.
2015. MyBehavior: automatic personalized health feedback from user
behaviors and preferences using smartphones. In In Proceedings of the
2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous
Computing (UbiComp ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 707–718. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2805840

[78] D Ridder, Karlein Schreurs, and Jozien Bensing. 2000. The relative
benefits of being optimistic: Optimism as a coping resource in multiple
sclerosis and Parkinson’s disease. British Journal of Health Psychology
5 (2000), 141–155. https://doi.org/10.1348/135910700168829

[79] Sara Riggare, Kenton T Unruh, Jasmine Sturr, and Josefa Domingos.
2017. Patient-driven N-of-1 in Parkinson ’ s Disease. Methods of
Information in Medicine 56, 99 (2017), e123–e128. https://doi.org/10.
3414/ME16-02-0040

[80] Scott C. Roesch and Bernard Weiner. 2001. A meta-analytic review
of coping with illness. Journal of Psychosomatic Research 50, 4 (2001),
205–219. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-3999(01)00188-X

[81] Anette Schrag, Richard Dodel, Annika Spottke, Bernhard Bornschein,
Uwe Siebert, and Niall P. Quinn. 2007. Rate of clinical progression in
Parkinson’s disease. A prospective study. Movement Disorders 22, 7
(2007), 938–945. https://doi.org/10.1002/mds.21429

[82] Jessica Schroeder, Chia-Fang Chung, Daniel A. Epstein, Ravi Karkar,
Adele Parsons, Natalia Murinova, James Fogarty, and Sean A. Munson.

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 152018. Examining Self-Tracking by People with Migraine. Proceedings
of the 2018 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2018 - DIS ’18
(2018), 135–148. https://doi.org/10.1145/3196709.3196738

[83] Jessica Schroeder, Jane Hoffswell, Chia-fang Chung, James Fogarty,
Sean Munson, and Jasmine Zia. 2017. Supporting patient-provider
collaboration to identify individual triggers using food and symptom
journals. In In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Sup-
ported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW ’17). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 1726–1739. https://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998276
[84] Jessica Schroeder, Chelsey Wilks, Kael Rowan, Arturo Toledo, Ann
Paradiso, Mary Czerwinski, Gloria Mark, and Marsha M. Linehan.
2018. Pocket Skills: A Conversational Mobile Web App To Support
Dialectical Behavioral Therapy. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2018). ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173972

[85] Jan Smeddinck, Sandra Siegel, and Marc Herrlich. 2013. Adaptive
difficulty in exergames for Parkinson’s disease patients. Graphics
Interface Conference 2013 (2013), 141–148.

[86] Kiley Sobel, Alexander Fiannaca, Jon Campbell, Harish Kulkarni, Ann
Paradiso, Ed Cutrell, and Meredith Ringel Morris. 2017. Exploring
the Design Space of AAC Awareness Displays. In Proceedings of the
2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI
’17. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2890–2903. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3025453.3025610

[87] Jonathan Stamford, Peter Schmidt, and Karl Friedl. 2015. What En-
gineering Technology Could Do for Quality of Life in Parkinson’s
Disease: a Review of Current Needs and Opportunities. IEEE Jour-
nal of Biomedical and Health Informatics 19, 6 (2015), 1–1. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/JBHI.2015.2464354

[88] Daniel Tarsy. 2018. Device-assisted and surgical treatments for Parkin-
son disease. In UpToDate, Howard I. Hurtig and April F. Eichler (Eds.).
Wolters Kluwer, Waltham, MA, 1–28.

[89] Daniel Tarsy. 2018. Motor fluctuations and dyskinesia in Parkson
disease. In UpToDate, Howard I. Hurtig and April F. Eichler (Eds.).
Wolters Kluwer, Waltham, MA.

[90] Daniel Tarsy. 2018. Nonpharmacologic management of Parkinson’s
Disease. In UpToDate, Howard I. Hurtig and April F. Eichler (Eds.).

Wolters Kluwer, Waltham, MA.

[91] Tammy Toscos, Kay Connelly, and Yvonne Rogers. 2012. Best inten-
tions: Health Monitoring Technology and Children. In Proceedings
of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems - CHI ’12. 1431–1440. https://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208603
[92] Julio Vega, Samuel Couth, Ellen Poliakoff, Sonja Kotz, Matthew Sulli-
van, Caroline Jay, Markel Vigo, and Simon Harper. 2018. Back to Ana-
logue: Self-Reporting for Parkinson’s Disease. In Proceedings of the 2018
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’18. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173648
[93] Peter West, Richard Giordano, Max Van Kleek, and Nigel Shadbolt.
2016. The quantified patient in the doctor’s office: Challenges &
opportunities. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
3066–3078. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858445

[94] Peter West, Max Van Kleek, Richard Giordano, Mark J Weal, and Nigel
Shadbolt. 2018. Common Barriers to the Use of Patient-Generated
Data Across Clinical Settings. In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’18. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174058

[95] Cecilia Winberg, M. Kylberg M., C. Pettersson, T. Harnett, P-O. Hedvall,
T. Mattsson, and E. Mansson Lexell. 2017. The Use of Apps for Health
in Persons with Multiple Sclerosis, Parkinson’s Disease and Stroke
– Barriers and Facilitators. In Harnessing the Power of Technology to
Improve Lives, P. Cudd and L. de Witte (Eds.). IOS Press, 638–641.
[96] Andong Zhan, Max A. Little, Denzil A. Harris, Solomon O. Abiola,
E. Ray Dorsey, Suchi Saria, and Andreas Terzis. 2016. High Frequency
Remote Monitoring of Parkinson’s Disease via Smartphone: Platform
Overview and Medication Response Detection. ArXiv e-prints (2016),
1–12. arXiv:1601.00960 http://arxiv.org/abs/1601.00960

[97] Haining Zhu, Joanna Colgan, Madhu Reddy, and Eun Kyoung
Sharing patient-generated data in clinical prac-
Choe. 2017.
tices: An interview study.
In American Medical
Informatics
Association Annual Symposium proceedings, Vol. 10. 1303–1312.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28269928{%}5Cnhttp:
//www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=PMC5333267

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 107Page 16