Supporting Meaningful Personal Fitness:
the Tracker Goal Evolution Model

Jasmin Niess
LMU Munich
Munich, Germany
jasmin.niess@psy.lmu.de

Paweł W. Wo´zniak
University of Stuttgart
Stuttgart, Germany
pawel.wozniak@vis.uni-stuttgart.de

ABSTRACT
While the number of users sporting ﬁtness trackers is con-
stantly increasing, little is understood about how tracking
goals can evolve over time. As recent studies have shown
that the long-term health effects of trackers are limited, we
need to readdress how trackers engage users. We conducted
semi-structured interviews and an online survey to explore
how users change their tracking goals. Based on our results,
we created the Tracker Goal Evolution Model. The model de-
scribes how tracker goals can evolve from internal user needs
through qualitative goals to quantitative goals that can be used
with trackers. It also includes trust and reﬂection as key con-
textual factors contributing to meaningful transitions between
goals. We postulate showing how tracker goals relate to other
personal ﬁtness goals as key for long-term engagement with
trackers. Our model is useful for designers of future trackers
as a tool to create evolving and meaningful tracking goals.

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.m Information interfaces and presentation: Miscellaneous

Author Keywords
wellbeing; well-being; health; ﬁtness trackers; model

INTRODUCTION
Wearable ﬁtness trackers, available as standalone devices or
part of smart watches have now established themselves on the
consumer market. Trackers promise the users opportunities to
improve ﬁtness and lead a healthier life. The ﬁrst longitudinal
studies on the health effects of wearing a ﬁtness tracker are
now available, showing that while an initial health effect was
observed, ﬁtness trackers failed to offer long-term wellbeing
support to users [22]. Concurrently, past research reported
that users ﬁnd it hard to express their expected ﬁtness levels
through metric-based goals supported by ﬁtness trackers [16].
As a consequence, there is a need for a new generation of
ﬁtness trackers that support long-term health goals taking the
complex facets of how the ﬁtness and motivation of a user

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montreal, QC, Canada
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ISBN 978-1-4503-5620-6/18/04. . . $15.00
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173745

evolves into account. Research in Human-Computer Interac-
tion (HCI) is yet to address the next steps in understanding
tracking in order to build better, long-term supportive trackers.

Recent work in HCI which explored issues such as lapses [12],
aesthetic appeal [25], adherence [32] and competition [16]
for using a tracker indicates that goals are a recurrent theme
when users interact with trackers. However, the ﬁeld is yet to
explore the intricacies of managing and setting goals. Thus, a
better understanding of how users choose and use their goals
is required. We propose readdressing the question of how,
when and why to set goals in trackers. To this end, we studied
users’ relationship with goals, how they adapt and plan goals
and how their goals relate to their data collection practices.
Through a series of interviews and a survey, we established an
account of the roles goals may play in ﬁtness tracking. Based
on our ﬁndings, we propose a new understanding of goals
for ﬁtness trackers in the form of the Tracker Goal Evolution
Model. The model uses hedonic and eudaimonic wellbeing as
underlying concepts that help create more meaningful goals
for trackers. Hedonic wellbeing focuses on the presence of
positive affect and the absence of negative affect. Furthermore
hedonic wellbeing is often associated with pleasure and fun.
Eudaimonic wellbeing is about self-fulﬁlment, ﬁnding mean-
ing in life and developing one’s potential [30]. Our model is
intended to serve as a submodel for existing models of per-
sonal informatics. Our approach provides new insights for
designing ﬁtness goals that evolve with the user and support
long-term tracker usage.

This paper contributes the following: (1) a qualitative study of
the practices in using tracker goals consisting of 19 interviews
and a survey with n = 162, (2) an account of the users’ current
practices with tracker goals and (3) the Tracker Goal Evolution
Model — a new understanding of goals that uses the lens of
hedonic and eudaimonic wellbeing.

In this work, we ﬁrst introduce the reader to hedonic and
eudaimonic wellbeing and review related work in HCI on
understanding user practices around trackers. Next, we report
on the details of how we conducted the interviews and the
survey. We then introduce the Tracker Goal Evolution Model.
The following section illustrates how the model describes user
practices around ﬁtness tracker goals. Finally, we propose
how our results may be operationalised to enable designing
meaningful goals for personal trackers.

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 171Page 1RELATED WORK
In this section, we ﬁrst introduce the reader to the hedonic and
eudaimonic wellbeing literature to build the understanding
lens we apply in this paper. We then review past work in the
HCI ﬁeld in the area of personal informatics and showcase
how an extended understanding of tracker goals is needed.

Hedonic and Eudaimonic Wellbeing
In this work, we use the lens of hedonic and eudaimonic
wellbeing to understand a subset of the user’s internalised
needs that are manifested through goals. These goals can be
supported with ﬁtness trackers. These concepts form the theo-
retical basis of the understanding of current practices in our
model. Research in Psychology has been using two differ-
ent conceptualisations of wellbeing for the last two decades,
hedonic wellbeing and eudaimonic wellbeing [30, 34]. The
main focus in the ﬁeld of wellbeing research lies in hedonic
theories. This concept has mainly been associated with the
presence of positive affect and the absence of negative effect.
However, recently scholars have begun to recognize the poten-
tial of eudaimonic wellbeing as a means of gaining a deeper
understanding of user behaviors and needs. Eudaimonic well-
being focuses on self-fulﬁlment and meaning [30]. Positive
psychology (the scientiﬁc study of positive human functioning
and ﬂourishing [31]), points out that the notion of subjective
wellbeing is often used for the concept of hedonic wellbeing
and the notion of psychological wellbeing for the eudaimonic
approach [10]. Hedonia and eudaimonia are not opposites, nor
are they mutually exclusive; they are complementary psycho-
logical functions [19]. As the literature does not agree on a
single conceptualisation of hedonia and eudaimonia [21], we
focus on recurrent characteristics of hedonic and eudaimonic
wellbeing to use them to understand ﬁtness tracker goals.

Four distinct categories of wellbeing deﬁnitions can be
found [21]: Orientations focus on people’s aspirations, mo-
tives, goals, values and ideals; Behaviors describe activities
of individuals; Experiences are constituted through emotions,
cognitive or affective appraisals; and Functioning addresses
the individual’s potential of living a healthy, functioning life.
The concepts of hedonia and eudaimonia have been featured
in recent HCI research. Notably, Mekler and Hornbæk [27]
discussed how user experience research can beneﬁt from em-
bracing the concepts of hedonia and eudaimonia. Our work is
the ﬁrst, to our knowledge, to apply these concepts to tracking.
Here, we do not address hedonic and eudaimonic experiences.
Instead, our work addresses the concepts of hedonic and eu-
daimonic wellbeing with a focus on orientations.

Hedonic wellbeing
The philosopher Aristippus introduced the term Hedonism in
the fourth century BC. He postulated that the search for plea-
sure was the most desirable good [33]. Hedonic wellbeing is
often associated with the term ‘happiness’ and its dimensions
can be positive feeling, pleasure, enjoyment, positive emo-
tions, painlessness, ease and satisfaction amongst others [10,
20]. The hedonic concept can include physical pleasure as
well as feelings of emotional or cognitive comfort. In a he-
donic mindset people focus on wellbeing as an outcome [14].
However, the concept of life satisfaction does not fall into the
classic understanding of hedonic wellbeing [9].

Eudaimonic wellbeing
The ﬁrst one to deﬁne the concept of eudaimonia was the
Greek philosopher Aristotle [18]. Aristotle postulated that
the key to wellbeing was to develop one’s potentials and live
a meaningful and authentic life. Even though deﬁnitions of
eudaimonic wellbeing vary widely, some recurring aspects can
be found [20]. Eudaimonic wellbeing can relate to many as-
pects of an individual’s life such as: value, relevance, maturity
ethics or autonomy.

We believe that hedonic and eudaimonic wellbeing, as it offers
an operationalisation of needs related to oneself, offers a way
to gain a deep understanding of ﬁtness tracker goals. Fowers
et al. [14] found that hedonic and eudaimonic wellbeing are
directly related to goal orientation. That is why, in our inquiry,
we use the concepts to study and chart how users manage,
change and deﬁne ﬁtness tracker goals. We noticed that these
can evolve like the ever-changing wellbeing needs of an indi-
vidual. Using this analysis lens resulted in the emergence of
our Tracker Goal Evolution Model.

Personal Informatics
A large array of past research efforts explored the understand-
ing of user practices around trackers. As more and more
users buy ﬁtness-tracking wearables, it remains a challenge
for HCI to enable designing trackers that offer tangible and
reproducible beneﬁts to wellbeing. This is a key consideration
as currently available trackers have been proven to offer lim-
ited health and wellbeing beneﬁts by studies in the medical
ﬁeld (e.g. [22, 3, 6]). Consequently, HCI looked for design
guidelines that understood ﬁtness trackers as instances of per-
suasive technology. Notably, Consolvo et al. [8] built a mo-
bile application prototype to establish design requirements for
health support technologies. They stressed that ﬁtness systems
‘should give users credit for their activities’ thus recognising
that building a sense of achievement was key for ﬁtness tech-
nologies. This indicates the importance of understanding goal
practices and how systems can support goal setting.

Challenges of Numeric Goals
As ﬁtness trackers became a mass-market phenomenon, HCI
scholars began to study different aspects of the tracker expe-
rience. Particular attention was given to step goals and step
programs. Gorm and Shklovski [15] found that workspace
step counting programs affected the users’ privacy concerns.
They also determined that the competition caused by step
goals in trackers called for users making moral choices and
possibly raising social tension while providing no tangible
health beneﬁt [16]. These examples show potential drawbacks
to ﬁtness goals that need to be addressed further.

Understanding Lapsing
Concurrently, understanding why users abandon and return to
ﬁtness trackers became a major question. Clawson et al. [7]
studied craigslist users disposing of tracking technology to
ﬁnd that it could be equally motivated by perceived failure,
success or social pressure. Further, Epstein et al. [11] found
that the practicalities connected with maintaining data or the
practices revealed by tracking may also be reasons for lapses.
To mitigate possible drawbacks of lapses, Agapie et al. [1]
proposed a design strategy to enable users to consciously

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 171Page 2lapse by using ‘cheat points’ and showed that this approach
produced positive behavioral effects. Our work is interestingly
different as, instead of mitigating or ﬁnding reasons for lapses,
we investigate them as possible manifestations of insufﬁcient
motivation provided by the tracking system.

Models of Personal Informatics
Finally, a number of efforts aimed at building a holistic un-
derstanding of practices around ﬁtness trackers. Notably, Ep-
stein et al. [13] proposed the lived informatics model of per-
sonal informatics that inspires designing for data-driven re-
ﬂection and described cycles of tracker use. They extended
earlier work by Li et al. [26] by, inter alia, accounting for
users returning to trackers after lapsing. Epstein et al. model
personal informatics as consisting of four major phases: (-)
deciding, (-) selecting, (-) tracking and (-) acting and lapsing.
The lived informatics model presents the most comprehensive
view of personal tracking presented so far, yet the authors ex-
plicitly state that one consequence of applying their model is
the need to harness goal migration. We aim to extend existing
models by focusing solely on the tracking and acting. Our
work aims to take another angle from previous works as it
looks speciﬁcally at goals related to ﬁtness in order to aid in
designing more engaging tracking experiences. We strive to
understand goals better to help users continue what Epstein at
al. call tracking and acting, thus possibly producing long-term
beneﬁts. Hence, a need for a model that speciﬁcally addresses
goals emerges.

Additionally, Rooksby et al. [29] identiﬁed tracking styles
that characterised different data-driven needs of users. Tang
and Kay [32] studied data practices of those using trackers
long-term and found that users appreciate feedback about
their adherence and can reﬂect upon their own tracker prac-
In contrast, this work endeavors to understand user
tices.
practices speciﬁcally around tracker goals, thus investigating
how tracker goals can contribute to maintaining and/or im-
proving the user’s wellbeing. Our work is further motivated
by the fact that past research has shown a large array of user
behaviors and attitudes around trackers, yet current devices
only support a small number of goals.

METHOD
In order to explore the users’ relationship with tracker goals
and the ways they choose, manage and interact with goals, we
conducted a two-part inquiry. First, we conducted exploratory
interviews with participants who were active users of ﬁtness
trackers. Based on the interviews, we designed an online
survey to explore aspects of tracker goals in a larger population
sample.

Device
used

Fitbit
Fitbit
Xiaomi
Polar

Xiaomi

Garmin

Xiaomi
Fitbit
Apple
Watch
Apple
Watch
Apple
Watch
Xiaomi

Tracking
Time

Primary
goal

ID Age Sex

Profession

P1 29 M IT specialist
P2 30
F
P3 21 M
P4 18 M

Teacher
Student
Student

P5 29

F

Researcher

P6 22 M

Engineer

F
P7 29
P8 26 M

Researcher
Engineer

2 yrs.
2 yrs.
3 m.
2 yrs.

2 yrs.

8 m.

1 yr.
5 yrs.

P9 29 M Programmer

6 m.

Steps
Steps
Steps
Steps
Body
mass
Active
hrs.
Steps
Steps
Exercise
sessions

P10 35

F

Researcher

2 yrs.

Calories

P11 28 M Unemployed

P12 27

P13 29

F

F

P14 32 M

F
P15 41
P16 20 M
F
P17 27
F
P18 26

IT specialist
Data
specialist
Car
mechanic
Researcher
Student
Unemployed
Student

9 m.

1 yr.

Exercise
sessions
Steps

6 yrs.

Steps

Fitbit

1 yr.

6 m.
2 yrs.
4 yrs.
6 yrs.

Exercise
sessions
Steps
Steps
Steps
Steps

Pebble

Fitbit
Xiaomi
Fitbit
Fitbit

Table 1. An overview of the interview participants. All participants were
active tracker users. The duration reported is the time since the partic-
ipants stated tracking and in some cases includes lapse periods. Partici-
pant IDs are used throughout the paper to indicate interview quotes.

receiving consent from the participant. Table 3.1 shows an
overview of the interview participants.

Interview protocol
In the interview, we ﬁrst obtained demographic data and infor-
mation about their daily usage of the tracker. We then inquired
about the goals set, the motivations behind setting the goal(s)
and the interviewees’ history of changing goals. We paid par-
ticular attention to whether they planned the evolution of the
goals and the reasons for changing (or not changing) them.
In the next part of the interview, we investigated if the way
users managed goals may have been connected to a history
of lapses (which might have been key to understanding their
tracker experience as shown by Epstein et al. [11]). Finally,
we explored if and how users reviewed and reﬂected upon
tracker data and how goals may have facilitated that process.

Interviews
The semi-structured interviews lasted an average of 31 minutes
(20–65). Each of the interviews was a one-on-one session
with a single researcher. We recruited N = 18 participants
through snowball sampling starting with social media posts.
The participants were aged 18–41 (M = 26.67, SD = 5.42).
Nine interviewees were male and nine female. Interviews
were only conducted with participants who identiﬁed as users
of ﬁtness trackers. All the sessions were audio recorded upon

Analysis
All audio recordings were transcribed verbatim and imported
into Atlas.ti analysis software. Two researchers coded a rep-
resentative sample of 15% of the material using open coding.
Next, a coding tree was established through iterative discus-
sion. The remaining transcripts were split between the two
researchers and coded individually. A ﬁnal discussion session
was conducted to ﬁnalise the coding tree after the material was
coded. We then identiﬁed emerging themes in the transcript

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 171Page 3Figure 1. Our Tracker Goal Evolution Model. The model describes how qualitative goals emerge from internalised hedonic/eudaimonic needs. It then
illustrates how qualitative goals are translated to quantitative tracker goals through reﬂection and trust.

used. Further, the majority (109 participants, 67%) of answers
reported experiencing a lapse in tracking, deﬁned as a break
from using the tracker longer than a month. Most of the
respondents (112, 69%) acquired the trackers themselves, but
50 participants had received a tracker as a gift.

THE TRACKER GOAL EVOLUTION MODEL
Based on the interviews and survey, we developed a new model
of how ﬁtness trackers goals evolve. The Tracker Goal Evolu-
tion Model focuses solely on understanding the needs of the
users in terms of ﬁtness tracking and meaningfully translating
them into ﬁtness goals. Further, it enables designing new goals
and adjusting them as the user’s ﬁtness changes.

Our model is intended to be a subordinate construct to Ep-
stein et al.’s [13] lived informatics model and, to a lesser
degree, the stage-based model of personal informatics [26].
We extend the lived informatics model by addressing goals
in more detail. We found that assuring that the user’s goals
can effectively evolve and keeping them engaged may prolong
the time in which the users stay in what Epstein et al. call the
tracking and acting stage. Similarly to Epstein et al., we do
not adopt a behavioral change goal, but attempt to account
for all motivations for tracking. However, while the lived
informatics model addresses goals (discussed as motivations
for deciding to track), it does not include changing goals and
evolving needs, which we integrate into our model.

The Levels of the Model
Our model divides the understanding of ﬁtness trackers into
three levels: hedonic and eudaimonic needs, qualitative goals,
and quantitative goals. We use the word ‘levels’ to distinguish
them from Epstein et al.’s ‘stages’ as the constructs in our
model are simultaneous rather than sequential. Each level
in our model represents a different level of abstraction with
regard to a ﬁtness goal. The levels are highly coupled, so that
success on any of the levels is tightly related to achievement

Figure 2. The quantitative tracker goals set by survey respondents. Note
that users were able to report multiple goals as setting multiple goals is
common in current commercial trackers. A free text ﬁeld was provided
for other goals, but none of the participants used it.

describing the practices around goals to further investigate in
the survey.

Survey
Our online survey further investigated tracker goal practices
identiﬁed in the interviews. The survey contained questions
about whether the users had a goal set in their tracker and
what kind of goal it was. Further, we explored how tracker
goals related to qualitative personal ﬁtness goals. We also
asked participants whether they had a history of changing
goals and reasons for (not) changing goals. Finally, we asked
about the role of goals in their social environment. We used
promoted social media posts and university mailing lists to
recruit n = 162 participants (85 male, 77 female, aged 17–66,
M = 27.96, SD = 8.21). The survey was available over three
weeks.

All survey respondents were active users of ﬁtness trackers.
137 participants were based in the European Union and 15
in the US. 75% (121 participants) of the participants had a
goal set in their tracker, with the majority using a step goal.
Figure 2 presents the different tracker goals the respondents

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 171Page 4on the other levels, and a lack of satisfaction on one of the
levels negatively affects the rest of the model.

We deﬁne the most abstract level as hedonic and eudaimonic
needs. This level refers to the highly internalised needs of a
user which are often not explicitly verbalised. While these
needs vary signiﬁcantly between tracker users they form both
the core of their motivation and the anticipated beneﬁts of
tracking. In our model, the user primarily evolves on this level
and the consequences of that evolution are then carried onto
the following levels.

Qualitative goals form the next level in our model. They con-
stitute a manifestation of the hedonic and eudaimonic needs.
Qualitative goals are often verbalised and users consider them
rational. The verbalisation of needs is often connected with
social exchange. Users are able to share and discuss their goal
with their social environment, e.g. their peer group. Further-
more, they are often regarded as sources of motivation and
provide a personal reference for ﬁtness achievement.

We deﬁne the most concrete level in our model as quantitative
goals. These goals are often expressed by numbers and can be
input in a ﬁtness tracker. Quantitative goals are translations of
qualitative goals into a form that can be used in a tracker. We
further deﬁne two supporting factors necessary for this trans-
lation to be successful. Building trust in the goal and in the
tracker is required for the goal to be relevant and stay mean-
ingful for the user. The goal must enable reﬂection so that it
can evolve and connect to the higher levels of the model. Here
our model differs signiﬁcantly from Li et al. [26]. While they
saw reﬂection as a necessary condition, our model suggests
that reﬂection and trust reinforce a pre-existing connection
between qualitative and quantitative goals.

UNDERSTANDING THE MODEL
In this section we show how our model relates to the data we
gathered in our studies and how it describes the current user
practices around ﬁtness tracker goals. Here, we present the
recurring themes from the interview and survey data. As the
model is closely tied to ﬁtness tracking practice, it can be used
to support designing meaningful goals.

Hedonic and Eudaimonic Needs
Through the coding process we found that users often used
vague descriptions of their needs and motivations in the track-
ing context. Even though a broad spectrum of needs was
expressed by the interviewees, they struggled to explicitly de-
scribe qualitative goals and a desire to transition from hazy
descriptions to something ‘easier to access’ (P6). They strug-
gled to specify what they hoped to gain from tracking:

[ . . . ] it is just more gadget for me than something that I
really need. But I bought another one when the ﬁrst one
broke, so it means something. (P7)

Another user expressed that she lacked clear goals as obtaining
a tracker was motivated simply by her curiosity:

I really like playing around with technology and I also
wanted to get a little more active. (P2)

Another interviewee mentioned that an important goal quality
is that the goal should make you feel good. Yet they found
it hard to provide a more detailed description of what ‘feel-
ing good’ would entail and they questioned the meaning of
quantitative metrics:

[ . . . ] all the metrics we look at right now are really
subjective. Everyone has a different stride which is then
counted as one step [ . . . ] a meaningful goal is when
you’re satisﬁed with yourself, so with your ﬁtness level
[ . . . ] on a meta level [ . . . ] When you’re satisﬁed with
yourself and the metrics are in a way that they feel right
for you. For example, maybe you’re already ﬁt if you run
only 6,000 to 7,000 steps but the tracker recommends
10,000 steps. That’s a really stupid metric because some
people are also ﬁt even if they run much more or just
less. I think this is a very, very important factor for this
[ . . . ] the tracker says for each person 10,000 steps is the
ultimate goal. That’s probably a stupid metric. (P11)

The interviews showed that many users assessed the meaning
and value of what they were striving for through their own
feelings, instead of specifying a goal based on how they would
like to feel. The following statement of one of the users shows
that the connection between the user’s feelings and his goal
remained intangible.

[ . . . ] every time when you realize that it has an effect on
your life, health and condition. I also saw the difference
on myself and how do I feel when I was running and when
I was not. And the general awareness that when you train
you are feeling better and you are in a better condition
what affects on your family life in the future. (P8)

Users would often communicate a general need to evolve.
They outlined their striving to become a ‘better person’. Yet,
they were still vague when queried about the nature of what
the goal to achieve that should look like:

Going with the goals helps me achieve more. I’m this
type of person. It’s simpler to make new habits and just
be better. (P11)

One user emphasised the desire to regain a former ﬁtness level.
Interestingly, the means to achieve that were not described in
detail:

Ah, my idea is just to get back to where I was before
pregnancy. That’s it. I think I reached a plateau there. I
couldn’t do more than that. If I wanted to do more than
that then I should stop working and do sports! (P10)

Our results show that users often ﬁnd it hard to express their
ﬁtness goals. It becomes especially hard if one tries to for-
mulate goals using the means available in current commercial
trackers. On one hand, this is caused by the multitude of moti-
vations for tracking (here our ﬁnding connect to Epstein et al.’s
model [13]). On the other, we observed that participants often
struggled with expressing their fundamental human needs with
regard to wellbeing. That is why, in our model, we employ
the theories of hedonic and eudaimonic wellbeing. Our model
describes current practices as it shows that users need support
for manifesting basic wellbeing needs (deﬁned through hedo-

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 171Page 5nia and eudaimonia) in the form of qualitative goals. Hedonia
and eudaimonia can manifest goals, needs or both.

Qualitative and Quantitative Goals
Models of personal informatics list different motivations for
starting the tracking experience [13], yet they do not discuss
how these motivations relate to tracker goals. We observed
that motivations (which stem from hedonic/eudaimonic needs)
are often manifested through qualitative goals and then trans-
lated to quantitative goals that can be input into trackers. Thus,
understanding the relationship between qualitative and quanti-
tative goals is a key element in our model.

We noted that 97% of the participants in our survey reported
having a qualitative goal. This was reﬂected in the interviews,
where most users replied with a qualitative goal when asked
about ‘a goal’. One participant explicitly stated that she did not
ﬁnd a quantitative goal meaningful in contrast to her qualitative
goals:

[ . . . ] since I remember, I did a lot of sports. The numbers
don’t motivate me. (P17)

Further, when we reﬂect upon perspectives on their desired
ﬁtness, participants would often refer to mental states and
a personal perception of being on track as a reference. The
ultimate goal for ﬁtness was often described in terms of moti-
vation and perception of progress:

The most important thing is that the goal actually is
related to some kind known level/range to some extent,
that we consider ourselves active or advanced and [ . . . ]
also motivates us to perform better. (P1)

We further observed that the users would set qualitative goals
for ﬁtness activities that were not explicitly tracked. They
used quantitative metrics as approximations of their activity,
but they were concerned primarily with the untracked activity.
P18 reﬂected how step counting complemented her activity
in football practice where team expectations were her main
focus:

[ . . . ] in the past things that have motivated me have been
being part of a team. Not necessarily for step count but
I did play soccer for my university and knowing that I
had a bunch of other team mates who were counting on
me to be ﬁt really motivated me to make sure that I was
actually working out and getting steps in. . . well really,
getting runs in at that point. (P18)

Similarly, users reported making day-to-day decisions using
qualitative goals. Participants would often aim to keep a per-
ceived activity level without referring to qualitative measures
thus prioritising their perception of activity over tracker met-
rics:

[ . . . ] OK, today I will work in the lab with my computer,
so the day will be a bit lazy, so it will be good if I will
take a longer walk and I’m OK with that. (P4)

In contrast, our study also included users who had very well
manifested hedonic needs which were easily translated into
quantitative measures. These users would build their entire
experience around documenting progress in numbers:

Figure 3. 76% of the survey participants reported that they ‘strongly
agree’ or ‘agree’ with the sentence ‘I would like to understand how my
tracker works.’.

I’m just obsessed with the weight. I mean I have phases.
At some point I was really obsessed with the steps, so then
I would just really walk in the apartment, [ . . . ] so it’s
kind of claustrophobic. [ . . . ] But now I’m really obsessed
with the weight. And the scale is really accurate. You
can really see if there’s 100g on or off. So I feel like I
document this, I did it. (P7)

While P7 experienced an effective match between her needs
and the quantitative measures, other users stated that numeric
metrics posed some challenges. One participant who had
an active hours goal expressed that the time periods were
arbitrary and could sometimes be disruptive, which illustrates
a mismatch between the qualitative goal (‘be active throughout
the day’) and the quantitative translation in the tracker (‘Make
250 steps in 9, 60-minute periods starting at the full hour’):

Yeah, I actually sometimes get annoyed, ’cause some-
times I’m pretty focused and then it interrupts me. I’ve
never really appreciated that. . . being the middle of a
thing and be like ‘Yeah get up!’ It’s not really my behav-
ior. (P18)

It can be observed that the translation from qualitative to quan-
titative goals is a factor that determines the quality of the
experience of tracker goals. Our model encourages making
that translation explicit and empowering users to realise how
the quantitative goals that their tracker uses relate to their
perception of ﬁtness. Our results show that the awareness of
that relationship can lead to increased engagement and foster
potential for long-term usage. Tracker goal designs should
make this relationship approachable and ensure the users are
aware of the purpose of their qualitative goals. We determined
that two factors, reﬂection and trust, are key to strengthen
the user’s understanding of how tracker goals relate to their
personal ﬁtness goals.

Supporting Factors: Reﬂection and Trust
Our survey has shown that 76% of the participants expressed
the desire to understand more about their tracker as shown in
Figure 3. Simultaneously, 48% of the users perceived their
tracker as accurate (see Figure 4). This illustrates that those
using ﬁtness trackers have a need for increased knowledge of
how the tracker works. Further, they do not fully trust the data
provided by current commercially available ﬁtness trackers.
These opinions also resonated in our interviews.

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 171Page 6The limited accuracy of current trackers caused some users to
wonder how much knowledge about their body their trackers
should provide. For users who aimed to get a deep understand-
ing of the metrics, a mismatch potentially caused by lack of
accuracy was a reason for concern:

For the heart rate it’s very difﬁcult because it’s often very
different and I’m not sure if this is a measurement error
or is this my real heart rate? Because sometimes I am
working really slowly and then I have a heartbeat of 140
where I usually have a heart rate of 90 or 100. (P7)

Another aspect of trust that we found in our data was trusting
in the ﬁtness goal being meaningful. Users endeavored to
understand enough about the goal so that they could ﬁnd it
actionable and feel in control of their progress. They also
expressed the desire to trust in their tracker helping them
manage activity towards their goal. One user was disappointed
at the notiﬁcations reminding them to move when they have
already exceeded their goal for the day:

Maybe if I would understand a step goal a little bit more
I could say ‘OK, I [want to] accomplish 20k steps’. I
think that I would appreciate it a little bit more [ . . . ] but
when it tells me to move I’m kinda annoyed, when I’ve
achieved this step goal [ . . . ] It usually happens when
I’ve been walking a lot. (P12)

Users also appeared to lose trust in their goal when it did
not adjust with signiﬁcant changes in their life. Participants
found that they could not connect tracker goals with changing
training regimes, nutrition patterns or family situations. One
interviewee remarked that she found her goal useful before
her pregnancy, but the goal became confusing after the birth.
This shows how the user trusts the goal to be meaningful and
expects to be able to reﬂect upon it.

But before pregnancy I was looking at the green cycle,
circle, the exercise thing [referring to Apple Watch activ-
ity visualisation]. But I don’t have really intense exercise
right now, so doesn’t really tell me more. But before I
was looking at it, for example to cycle more, faster or
something like that. [ . . . ] I don’t really understand it,
I don’t know. Maybe I need an explanation why this is
useful or not, I don’t know. (P10)

Reﬂecting on Goals
Several participants reported that they not only expected the
tracker to reﬂect profound changes in their lives, but also
respond to slowly changing routines on an everyday basis.
One reported that the tracker understood their erratic work and
sleep patterns caused by a medical condition:

Sometimes when I work from home the step counter value
is much lower. I can tell that I worked from home like
2 days or something over the weekend. Then I feel like
[ . . . ] it’s kind of nice to work from home, but then the
step counter is not really active. So next time, maybe
next week, I’ll have a full work week, so I won’t work
from home next week. [ . . . ] My medication is actually
inﬂuencing my sleeping patterns and I’m actively taking
medications to avoid this. And I change them according
to how effective they are. So I just check the sleeping time,

Figure 4. 47% of the survey participants reported that they ‘strongly
agree’ or ‘agree’ with the sentence ‘I feel that the tracker data precisely
describes my daily activity.’

Goals and Trust
We noted that many of the interviewees explicitly requested
that the tracker suppliers provide more information about the
inner workings of the device:

[ . . . ] they have to describe precisely, or more or less
precisely if they don’t to want to show the algorithm,
how is this calculated or something. Or, just to show a
description would be enough. Here we take your heart
rate variability and multiply it by 60. I don’t know. That
would be enough. (P8)

Further, most interviewees recalled being surprised by tracker
measurements or thinking that the measurement was incor-
rect. This often led to confusion or immediate doubt in the
accuracy of the device. One participant was concerned by the
discrepancy between their perceived sleep quality and the data
provided by the tracker:

But when you’re tired and you have the feeling that you’ve
slept only for three hours and it shows you eight, you
cannot believe. Or sometimes, I don’t actually know how
it works, but it shows how many times did you wake up at
night and sometimes it shows 15 and you don’t remember
waking up at all. But then I still cannot say that it’s true,
’cause you move when you sleep and you’re not so sure
that you woke up. Maybe just the device didn’t recognise
it. (P16)

In contrast, another user also believed that the tracker provided
sleep data that was not fully accurate. However, they decided
to use the offered precision as an acceptable reference metric:

Yes, it’s not 100% trustworthy, but you can get a hint
of quite well of what was your sleep and how was your
sleep. (P17)

We also observed that a lack of accuracy and/or trust in the data
may have led to partial abandonment. One of the interviewees
reported initially tracking sleep, but then realising that the
metrics provided did not enable him to understand his sleep
patterns well enough:

Before I was also using it to track sleeping, but I’m not
using it anymore, because it was not giving me enough
data. (P9)

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 171Page 7Figure 5. Example of how the Tracker Goal Evolution Model can be used to understand a part of the goal practices of a single user. The user’s goals are
built around the eudaimonic need to feel well in one’s body. The need is then manifested through the desire to lose weight and lead an active lifestyle.
The tracker can then help translate those goals into an active hours goal and a step goal. In order for the goals to provide engagement and allow for
evolution, the user must know the relationship between the numeric metrics and their qualitative perception. They also need to trust and understand
their goal and tracking technology.

not the quality but the time. So like when I went to sleep
when I woke up and stuff like this. Yeah, it’s kind of an
overview of how things were this week. (P5)

We further observed that users wanted to reﬂect upon activities
that were not explicitly tracked and relate them to tracker
metrics so that they could have an overview of their ﬁtness.
One participant tried to compare their car mechanic work with
running:

If a wheel weighs 120 pounds and I have to move that
around a lot, granted, it rolls, but you also have to pick it
up half a meter-ish. The amount of work I do is generally
in spurts. Translate that to the running side, it would be
more like sprinting a lot, because I’ll drive for an hour to
a location, work on a couple trucks and even when I’m
working on a truck, I’ll work in one spot for 15 minutes
to an hour. (P15)

Some interviewees reported that they had moments when they
explicitly decided to reﬂect on their data. To that end, they
used opportune moments; periods when they had time to spare:

Last time I had some problems with falling asleep, I went
to the beach, I synchronized my Fitbit with my smart-
phone and checked some data. It makes more sense to
check it after a longer time because then the plots are
showing better data. (P1)

Another participant used the metrics explicitly to calm down
and maintain a slow walking pace in a stressful situation:

During my master exams I was stressed and I didn’t know
what to do with myself. I wondered what I could do to just
free myself from the surroundings and be less stressed
out and I just started walking with my dog. [ . . . ] I had

a slower pace, so I could chill and think about different
things. (P16)

Finally, many of our participants expressed the desire that the
tracker should have provided them with an overall assessment
of how well they were in general. They wanted an objective
measure that would go beyond a perception that could be
gathered from other sources:

I also consider my tracker as a good summary of what
I do with my body. For example, for running, I do use
a running app, which tracks my activity while running
and I have in-depth stuff in it but for other activities I
don’t use any software or separate device to monitor the
goal [ . . . ] ’cause this I do more for fun and cause I
like being active [ . . . ] but the tracking could give me an
opportunity to sum it up and get a more or less precise
view [ . . . ] on all these activities. (P4)

Our results show that different dimensions of trust are instru-
mental in the user’s interactions with a ﬁtness tracker goal. In
our model, trust must be mediated to maintain engagement
with a ﬁtness goal. Two aspects of trust are key: trusting the
accuracy of the tracker and trusting that the ﬁtness goal is
meaningful. The ﬁrst kind of trust can be built by making
the operation principles of trackers available to users. We
observed that participants need more information about how
trackers store and process ﬁtness data in order to maintain
a more informed relationship with their ﬁtness goals. Trust
in the meaningfulness of one’s ﬁtness goals can be through
providing a clear link between the numerical metrics and their
envisioned consequences for health and wellbeing. This shows
how trust is a mediating factor in our model that is necessary
for users to connect qualitative and quantitative goals.

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 171Page 8However, we observe that trust cannot exist without the ability
to reﬂect. In our interviews, users often connected their qual-
itative achievements to quantitative goals through reﬂection.
Through using opportune moments to reﬂect users are looking
to qualitatively assess their progress towards their qualitative
goals with the help of the measures provided by the tracker.
Consequently, reﬂection is a necessary mediating factor in our
model. Together with trust, reﬂection forms two intertwined
requirements to keep the user engaged and provide a rich ex-
perience of ﬁtness tracking. Our results suggest that these two
qualities are necessary for the user’s goals to keep evolving
and empowering them to adjust their goals according to the
changes in their life.

USING THE MODEL
Having illustrated how our model reﬂects current user prac-
tices around trackers, we now show how it can aid the design
of tracker goals in a future generation of trackers. In order
for users to maintain engagement with their tracking experi-
ence, they need to engage with goals on the three levels of the
model.

Understanding of whether a goal stems from a hedonic or
eudaimonic need can help to design how the goal is communi-
cated and presented, and how progress is reported. However,
hedonic and eudaimonic needs of users are highly internalised,
so it may be hard to query the user and obtain explicit ac-
counts. Thus, we propose that systems begin the interaction
with goals on the qualitative goals level. This is in contrast
with current systems, which usually propose an arbitrarily se-
lected quantitative goal and, in some cases, help adjust it. Our
model shows that users require an explicit connection be-
tween the numeric values presented by trackers and their
qualitative goals. That is why we propose that tracker appli-
cations should ask users about qualitative goals ﬁrst. Then,
as the system processes the user’s qualitative goals, it can
propose a connected set of quantitative goals that would lead
to their achievement. Figure 5 presents an example of how our
model can be operationalised to map the goals of a speciﬁc
user.

We argue that the process of explicitly translating between
qualitative and quantitative goals is key for meaningful inter-
action with trackers. Our results show that the translation
needs to be accompanied by building trust. On one hand,
trackers should provide information on how goal metrics relate
to goals. Numeric metrics should be directly linked to antic-
ipated health and wellbeing beneﬁts. On the other hand, we
observed that users also desire to understand how the metrics
involved in their goals are obtained. Consequently, trackers
should provide information on how progress towards a given
goal is measured, in a form that is understandable by the user.

Further, our model can also be used to support the constant evo-
lution of goals that go beyond the current practice of simply in-
creasing goals by an arbitrary number. Firstly, trackers should
empower users to reﬂect on their qualitative progress by
referring back to qualitative goals and showing how daily
quantitative goals contribute to a larger qualitative meaning.
This will enable them to understand progress in qualitative
terms and adjust their qualitative goals in conjunction with

quantitative goals. Secondly, being aware of the user’s qual-
itative goals will enable designing systems that link them to
hedonic and eudaimonic needs. This, in turn, will enable
suggesting meaningful qualitative goals that foster reﬂection.

DISCUSSION
While we built the Tracker Goal Evolution Model to be as
descriptive of current practices around ﬁtness trackers as pos-
sible, it still constitutes a simpliﬁcation. Our model proposes
a way of thinking about ﬁtness tracker goals that highlights
the key elements of goal evolution that are needed to keep the
user engaged. However, our approach is neither exhaustive
nor fully analytical.

Hedonia and Eudaimonia are a Spectrum
Mapping a user’s needs into hedonia and eudaimonia is difﬁ-
cult and a topic of discussion in the ﬁeld of Psychology. Our
model does not require one to fully analyse a user’s needs as
this can only be done by the user themselves. Instead, the
fact that hedonia and eudaimonia are directly linked to qual-
itative goals in our model stresses the fact that ﬁtness goals
are manifestations of internalised needs. Remembering about
hedonic and eudaimonic wellbeing while setting ﬁtness goals
can assure that the user’s internalised motivations are part of
the goal setting process. While we recognise that the under-
standing of how ﬁtness goals relate to hedonia and eudaimonia
presented in this paper is not complete, our research shows
that quantitative goals are hard for users to relate to wellbeing.

Emphasising Transitions
The two transitions in our model (manifestation and transla-
tion) form an axis of goal evolution that should be strongly
supported by ﬁtness tracker designs. As our results show that
users are in need for additional aids in making those transi-
tions, a challenge for future design emerges. Concurrently,
users expressed a desire to understand how trackers work and
how the tracking metrics are obtained. Yet, current ﬁtness
tracking solutions usually offer a quick questionnaire at the
beginning of the tracking experience and there is little engage-
ment with the internals of the tracking system throughout the
usage period. We believe that future trackers should make the
infrastructure and the algorithms they use more transparent.
In line with the concept of seamful design [5] trackers could
show users parts of the details of their operations. Exposing
the ways data is gathered in ﬁtness trackers can help users
understand the metrics they generate and thus build trust in
the tracker. Showing how trackers decide to suggest goals to
users and making their anticipated beneﬁts explicit will help
users understand how their qualitative goals translate to their
quantitative goals better.

We recognise the possibility that some qualitative goals trans-
late to quantitative goals better than others. For example, the
interview data showed that participants concerned with weight
were more number-driven. This creates on opportunity for
future systems to offer multifaceted experiences that commu-
nicate with the user using a mix of qualitative and quantitative
terms tailored to the user’s personal goal. If future designs can
chart where the user is on the hedonia-eudaimonia spectrum

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 171Page 9and how number-oriented their ﬁtness goal can be, new track-
ers should be able to offer more effective feedback and more
personalised experiences.

Relation to Other Models
In this work, we illustrated how our model is subordinate to
other models of personal informatics. However, as our work
also addresses a number of high-level concepts, there are other
theories and models that can be used to understand elements
of the Tracker Goal Evolution Model. While reﬂection fea-
tures prominently in our model and we provided examples
of how users engage with trackers to reﬂect, we do not offer
solutions for designing for reﬂection nor does our work de-
scribe the process of reﬂection. We see an opportunity to apply
the knowledge and practices in reﬂective informatics (i.e. the
design and understanding of interactive artefacts that promote
and support the process of reﬂection [2]) to our model. Our
model can contribute to understanding technologies for reﬂec-
tion by helping chart goal evolution that lead to developing
reﬂective practice by users.

Further, we recognise that a model of trust could also be
applied to our model. For instance, the trust-theory model
from Castelfranchi and Falcone [4] provides a socio-cognitive
computational model that could potentially help unpack the
concept of trust in the Tracker Goal Evolution Model. This, in
turn, can enable a deeper understanding of the trust dynamics
involved in trusting the accuracy of the tracker and ﬁnding
one’s ﬁtness goal meaningful. Our model shows that future
tracker designs should embody trust to offer long-term engage-
ment. Thus, we see that future research on building trust in
tracker design is required.

Limitations
While we strived to make our model as comprehensive as pos-
sible, we are aware that it is prone to some limitations. Firstly,
our user sample consisted primarily of Western European par-
ticipants. Past work used primarily US-based populations
recruited through Mechanical Turk. We recognise that our
ﬁndings are still constrained within the Western culture. Fit-
ness trackers are not only prominent in Asia, but they are
also entering emerging markets and further studies are needed
to understand the user practices around trackers in these set-
tings. The user experience of personal informatics is likely
to be affected by cultural biases. The risks and opportunities
that come with the ubiquity of ﬁtness trackers may be expe-
rienced differently based on the sociocultural context of the
data collected.

Moreover, we decided to focus our inquiry solely on ﬁtness
tracking, while other models endeavored to cover the entire
ﬁeld of personal informatics. Our focus enabled us to engage
with the intricacies connected to ﬁtness, but it also limits the
applicability of our model. The relationship between quanti-
tative and qualitative goals in our model is described based
on user practices with very speciﬁc metrics, e.g. steps and
calories. Consequently, our model would need to be adjusted
to scale to other domains of personal informatics.

Future work
We believe our approach to understanding and designing ﬁt-
ness goals for trackers offers a more effective operationalisa-
tion than applying complex motivational theories from psy-
chology to designing for ﬁtness, in contrast to work by Knav-
ing et al. [24]. However, we see further improvements to
understanding ﬁtness tracker goals that can be addressed by
future research. Firstly, we envision that users can be queried
about the nature of their goals to identify how their goals are
placed in the hedonia-eudaimonia spectrum. This would en-
able designing goals that build on internalised motivations.
How the tracker could communicate with the user to obtain
such information is an open question, cf. [28].

Secondly, we wonder how a better understanding of one’s
goals and the goals of others can enhance social interaction.
Future research can explore how better ﬁtness goals can help
use tracking data in communication (much like HeartChat[17])
and sharing data to build insight, cf. [35]. Our model also
offers the possibility to understand the social dynamics in
families or groups behind goals to build situated reﬂection
systems (like [23]), but this potential must be veriﬁed in further
studies. Finally, we wonder how our model generalises and if
it needs to be adapted to domains other then ﬁtness tracking,
e.g. menstrual cycles, breastfeeding, diet tracking, or sleep.
While our inquiry was limited to tracking physical activity,
it may address other personal informatics experiences, much
like the lived informatics model [13].

CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced the Tracker Goal Evolution Model.
Our model describes the user practices around ﬁtness tracker
goals on three levels: Hedonic and eudaimonic needs, Qual-
itative goals and Quantitative goals. These three levels are
connected with two transitions: manifestation and translation.
We based our model on a series of semi-structured interviews
and an online survey. Our model enables charting an indi-
vidual’s goals in order to build more engaging and evolving
tracking experiences. The model can be used as a complement
to models of personal informatics as it offers a new perspec-
tive on how a user’s goals evolve through the journey through
personal tracking.

We hope that our work will help researchers and designers ad-
dress new challenges with personal tracking and build trackers
that offer long-term beneﬁts. Our model aims to contribute to
a new generation of trackers that offer engaging experiences
and tangible beneﬁts. In future work, we hope to investigate
how it can help generate alternative designs for ﬁtness trackers
and ways to communicate its levels and transitions to the user
in a meaningful way.

Acknowledgements
We thank Albrecht Schmidt, Sarah Diefenbach, Valentin
Schwind, and Philippa Beckman for their contributions to
the manuscript. Parts of this research were supported by the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 Programme under ERCEA
grant no. 683008 AMPLIFY and the German Federal Ministry
of Education and Research as part of the project KoBeLU
(grant no. 16SV7599K).

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 171Page 10REFERENCES
1. Elena Agapie, Daniel Avrahami, and Jennifer Marlow.

2016. Staying the Course: System-Driven Lapse
Management for Supporting Behavior Change. ACM
Press, 1072–1083. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858142

11. Daniel A. Epstein, Monica Caraway, Chuck Johnston, An
Ping, James Fogarty, and Sean A. Munson. 2016a.
Beyond Abandonment to Next Steps: Understanding and
Designing for Life after Personal Informatics Tool Use.
ACM Press, 1109–1113. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858045

2. Eric P.S. Baumer. 2015. Reﬂective Informatics:

12. Daniel A. Epstein, Jennifer H. Kang, Laura R. Pina,

Conceptual Dimensions for Designing Technologies of
Reﬂection. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 585–594. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702234

3. Dena M. Bravata, Crystal Smith-Spangler, Vandana

Sundaram, Allison L. Gienger, Nancy Lin, Robyn Lewis,
Christopher D. Stave, Ingram Olkin, and John R. Sirard.
2007. Using pedometers to increase physical activity and
improve health: a systematic review. Jama 298, 19
(2007), 2296–2304. http:
//jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/209526

4. Christiano Castelfranchi and Rino Falcone. 2010. Trust
theory: A socio-cognitive and computational model.
Vol. 18. John Wiley & Sons.

5. Matthew Chalmers and Areti Galani. 2004. Seamful

Interweaving: Heterogeneity in the Theory and Design of
Interactive Systems. In Proceedings of the 5th
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems: Processes,
Practices, Methods, and Techniques (DIS ’04). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 243–252. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1013115.1013149

6. Catherine B. Chan, Daniel A.J. Ryan, and Catrine

Tudor-Locke. 2004. Health beneﬁts of a pedometer-based
physical activity intervention in sedentary workers.
Preventive Medicine 39, 6 (Dec. 2004), 1215–1222. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2004.04.053

7. James Clawson, Jessica A. Pater, Andrew D. Miller,
Elizabeth D. Mynatt, and Lena Mamykina. 2015. No
longer wearing: investigating the abandonment of
personal health-tracking technologies on craigslist. ACM
Press, 647–658. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2807554

8. Sunny Consolvo, Katherine Everitt, Ian Smith, and
James A. Landay. 2006. Design requirements for
technologies that encourage physical activity. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
Factors in computing systems. ACM, 457–466.
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1124840

9. Edward L Deci and Richard M Ryan. 2008. Hedonia,

eudaimonia, and well-being: An introduction. Journal of
happiness studies 9, 1 (2008), 1–11.

10. Antonella Delle Fave, Ingrid Brdar, Teresa Freire, Dianne

Vella-Brodrick, and Marié P Wissing. 2011. The
eudaimonic and hedonic components of happiness:
Qualitative and quantitative ﬁndings. Social Indicators
Research 100, 2 (2011), 185–207.

James Fogarty, and Sean A. Munson. 2016b.
Reconsidering the Device in the Drawer: Lapses As a
Design Opportunity in Personal Informatics. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing
(UbiComp ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 829–840.
DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2971648.2971656

13. Daniel A. Epstein, An Ping, James Fogarty, and Sean A.
Munson. 2015. A lived informatics model of personal
informatics. ACM Press, 731–742. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804250

14. Blaine J. Fowers, Christine O. Mollica, and Erin N.
Procacci. 2010. Constitutive and instrumental goal
orientations and their relations with eudaimonic and
hedonic well-being. The Journal of Positive Psychology 5,
2 (2010), 139–153. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17439761003630045

15. Nanna Gorm and Irina Shklovski. 2016a. Sharing Steps

in the Workplace: Changing Privacy Concerns Over Time.
In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 4315–4319. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858352

16. Nanna Gorm and Irina Shklovski. 2016b. Steps, Choices

and Moral Accounting: Observations from a
Step-Counting Campaign in the Workplace. In
Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & Social
Computing (CSCW ’16). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
148–159. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819944

17. Mariam Hassib, Daniel Buschek, Paweł W. Wo´zniak, and
Florian Alt. 2017. HeartChat: Heart Rate Augmented
Mobile Chat to Support Empathy and Awareness. In
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 2239–2251. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025758

18. Luke Wayne Henderson and Tess Knight. 2012.

Integrating the hedonic and eudaimonic perspectives to
more comprehensively understand wellbeing and
pathways to wellbeing. International Journal of
Wellbeing 2, 3 (2012).

19. Veronika Huta. 2015. The complementary roles of

eudaimonia and hedonia and how they can be pursued in
practice. Positive Psychology in Practice: Promoting
Human Flourishing in Work, Health, Education, and
Everyday Life, (2015), 216–246.

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 171Page 1120. Veronika Huta. 2016. An overview of hedonic and

eudaimonic well-being concepts. Handbook of media use
and well-being: International perspectives on theory and
research on positive media effects (2016), 14–33.

Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 4509–4520. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858225

21. Veronika Huta and Alan S Waterman. 2014. Eudaimonia

28. Jasmin Niess and Sarah Diefenbach. 2016.

and its distinction from hedonia: Developing a
classiﬁcation and terminology for understanding
conceptual and operational deﬁnitions. Journal of
Happiness Studies 15, 6 (2014), 1425–1456.

Communication Styles of Interactive Tools for
Self-Improvement. Psychology of Well-Being 6, 1 (06 Jun
2016), 3. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s13612-016-0040-8

22. John M Jakicic, Kelliann K Davis, Renee J Rogers,

29. John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and

Wendy C King, Marsha D Marcus, Diane Helsel, Amy D
Rickman, Abdus S Wahed, and Steven H Belle. 2016.
Effect of wearable technology combined with a lifestyle
intervention on long-term weight loss: the IDEA
randomized clinical trial. Jama 316, 11 (2016),
1161–1171.

23. Kristina Knaving and Paweł Wo´zniak. 2016.

TickTockRun: Towards Enhancing Communication in
Runner Families. In Proceedings of the 19th ACM
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
and Social Computing Companion (CSCW ’16
Companion). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 309–312. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2818052.2869114

24. Kristina Knaving, Paweł Wo´zniak, Morten Fjeld, and

Staffan Björk. 2015. Flow is Not Enough: Understanding
the Needs of Advanced Amateur Runners to Design
Motivation Technology. In Proceedings of the 33rd
Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’15). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 2013–2022. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702542

25. Moon-Hwan Lee, Seijin Cha, and Tek-Jin Nam. 2015.

Patina Engraver: Visualizing Activity Logs As Patina in
Fashionable Trackers. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
1173–1182. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702213

26. Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A

Stage-based Model of Personal Informatics Systems. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’10). ACM, New
York, NY, USA, 557–566. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753409

27. Elisa D. Mekler and Kasper Hornbæk. 2016. Momentary

Pleasure or Lasting Meaning?: Distinguishing
Eudaimonic and Hedonic User Experiences. In

Matthew Chalmers Chalmers. 2014. Personal Tracking
As Lived Informatics. In Proceedings of the 32Nd Annual
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’14). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
1163–1172. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557039

30. Richard M Ryan and Edward L Deci. 2001. On happiness

and human potentials: A review of research on hedonic
and eudaimonic well-being. Annual review of psychology
52, 1 (2001), 141–166.

31. Martin EP Seligman and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. 2014.
Positive psychology: An introduction. In Flow and the
foundations of positive psychology. Springer, 279–298.

32. Lie Ming Tang and Judy Kay. 2017. Harnessing Long
Term Physical Activity Data&Mdash;How Long-term
Trackers Use Data and How an Adherence-based
Interface Supports New Insights. Proc. ACM Interact.
Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 1, 2, Article 26 (June
2017), 28 pages. DOI:http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3090091

33. Elizabeth Telfer. 1980. Happiness: An Examination of a
Hedonistic and a Eudaemonistic Concept of Happiness
and of the Relations Between Them, with a Consideration
of how Far and in what Sense Either Kind of Happiness
May be Said to be the Goal of Human Life. Macmillan.

34. Alan S Waterman. 1993. Two conceptions of happiness:
Contrasts of personal expressiveness (eudaimonia) and
hedonic enjoyment. Journal of personality and social
psychology 64, 4 (1993), 678.

35. Paweł W. Wozniak, Anton Fedosov, Eleonora Mencarini,
and Kristina Knaving. 2017. Soil, Rock, and Snow: On
Designing for Information Sharing in Outdoor Sports. In
Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing
Interactive Systems (DIS ’17). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 611–623. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3064663.3064741

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 171Page 12