Share, Show And Tell

TEI 2016, February 14-17, 2016, Eindhoven, the Netherlands

Technologies for Everyday Life Reflection: Illustrating a 
Design Space 
Elise van den Hoven 2,1,3,4 
elise.vandenhoven@uts.edu.au 
2University of Technology 
Sydney  
Faculty of Design Architecture 
and Building 
Ultimo NSW 2007, Australia 

Ine Mols 1,2 
i.mols@tue.nl 
1Eindhoven University of 
Technology  
Dept. of Industrial Design 
P.O. Box 513, 5600 RM  
Eindhoven, the Netherlands 

Berry Eggen 1,2 
j.h.eggen@tue.nl 
3ARC Centre of Excellence in 
Cognition and its Disorders 

4DJAD, University of Dundee 
Dundee, UK 

ABSTRACT 
Reflection  gives  insight,  supports  action  and  can  improve 
wellbeing. People might want to reflect more often for these 
benefits,  but  find  it  difficult  to  do  so  in  everyday  life. 
Research  in  HCI  has  shown  the  potential  of  systems  to 
support  reflection  in  different  contexts.  In  this  paper  we 
present  a  design  space  for  supporting  everyday 
life 
reflection.  We  produced  a  workbook  with  a  selection  of 
conceptual design proposals, which show how systems can 
take  different  roles  in  the  process  of  reflection:  triggering, 
supporting and capturing. We describe a design space with 
two  dimensions  by  combining  these  roles  with  strategies 
found in literature. We  contribute  to  the  extensive  body of 
work  on  reflection  by  outlining  how  design  for  everyday 
life  reflection  requires  a  focus  on  more  holistic  reflection, 
design with openness and integration in everyday life.  

Author Keywords 
Design Research, Reflection, Conceptual Design 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous;  

INTRODUCTION 
We  go  about  our  everyday  life  and  many  activities,  often 
without thinking about it. This normality and self-evidence 
is also what makes our everyday life so everyday. However, 
from  time  to  time,  we  might  think  about  our  lives,  our 
actions, thoughts, habits and choices. Through reflection we 
gain 
lessons.  Reflection  has  been 
extensively  discussed  in  the  context  of  learning  and 
professional  development  [18,  21,  25].  Within  healthcare 
and  design,  reflection  often  gives  insight  [3].  Rather  than 
‘only’  insight,  the  foreseen  benefit  in  much  work  on 

insight  and 

learn 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.  
TEI  '16,  February  14-17,  2016,  Eindhoven,  Netherlands   ©  2016  ACM. 
ISBN 978-1-4503-3582-9/16/02…$15.00   
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2839462.2839466 

53

personal  informatics  is  action.  The  line  of  reasoning 
suggests that showing users data about themselves will lead 
them  to  do  something,  presumably  something  different 
from  and  better  than  what  they  are  already  doing  [15]. 
Rather than reflection for these specific goals, we focus on 
what  we  call  everyday  life  reflection,  referring  to  all 
deliberate and critical thought processes concerning our day 
to day activities. This includes themes such as work, health, 
relationships, leisure time and personality. We see value in 
engaging  in  everyday  life  reflection  regularly,  as  a  way  to 
gain self insight and improve overall wellbeing. A moment 
of reflection can bring the mind at ease, provide a feeling of 
confidence or help solve problems.  

However,  engaging  in  reflection  is  far  from  straight 
forward.  It  is  a  complex  process  with  many  contextual 
factors  involved.  Design  to  support  reflection  is  therefor  a 
challenging,  but  worthwhile  ambition.  In  this  paper  we 
build upon the conceptual grounding by Baumer [3] and the 
landscape  described  by  Fleck  &  Fitzpatrick  [8],  aiming  to 
make  their  dimensions  more  specific  and  applied  to  the 
domain  of  everyday  life  reflection.  As  part  of  a  research 
through  design  process,  we  have  developed  a  set  of  thirty 
ideas  to  support  reflection.  Through  the  multiplicity  of 
ideas,  a  design  space  emerges  [9].  We  provide  a  set  of 
alternatives;  alternative  design  concepts 
that  support 
reflection  in  different  ways.  We  use  the  process  of 
designing these alternatives and the resulting set as a way to 
reflect on design for reflection in general. In this paper we 
describe  this  design  space  by  presenting  concepts  and  the 
roles  we  see  support  systems  can  take  in  the  process  of 
reflection. Before doing so, we will discuss related work to 
defining  reflection  and  discuss  common  strategies  to 
support  reflection.  In  line  with  Sengers  [22]  we  end  the 
paper  by  reflecting  on  our  own  work  and  process  as  well, 
providing  suggestions  for  designing  for  everyday  life 
reflection focusing on holistic reflection, openness in design 
and the integration in everyday life.  

DEFINING REFLECTION 
Despite its widespread use, the term reflection often lacks a 
thorough  definition  in  HCI  work  [3,7].  Here,  we  discuss 
some definitions of reflection to better ground our work and 
explain  our  perspective.  Baumer  [3]  explicitly  provides  a 
very inclusive definition of reflection as “reviewing a series 

 
 
 
 
Share, Show And Tell

TEI 2016, February 14-17, 2016, Eindhoven, the Netherlands

of previous experiences, […] putting them together in such 
a way as to come to a better understanding or to gain some 
sort  of  insight.”  [p.  94]  This  broad  definition  gives  a  good 
starting  point  for  the  types  of  processes  we  focus  on  but 
provides  little  insight  in  how  this  reviewing  leads  to 
insights.  This  process  is  described  in  more  detail  in  the 
model  presented  in  [24]  in  which  reflection  is  reviewed 
within  a  psychological  view  on  autobiographical  memory. 
Here,  reflection  is  seen  as  “remembering  plus  further 
analysis”  [p.  150].  This  analysis  is  divided  in  multiple 
layers, first of all split in either evaluation or explanation of 
the  remembered  experience.  On  a  third  layer,  the  model 
describes the underlying processes that can lead to provides 
more  grip  on 
in  reflection: 
abstraction,  comparison,  categorization  etc.  We  combine 
these  process  aspects  with  the  type  of  insight  we  strive 
from,  inspired  by  Mezirows  theory  [18].  Specifically  we 
build  upon  his  definition  of  critical  self-reflection  as 
“reassessing  our  own  orientation  to  perceiving,  knowing, 
believing,  feeling  and  acting.”[p  13].  From  a  memory  and 
HCI  perspective  we  are  interested  in  the  role  external 
triggers play in this process. Together, these bring us to our 
definition of everyday life reflection as: “Remembering and 
analyzing  past,  present  and  future  experiences  in  order  to 
reassess  our  perceptions,  beliefs,  feelings  and  actions 
regarding our everyday life.” This definition is the basis for 
our  concept  development,  however,  first  we  will  discuss 
related  work  on  reflection  support  with  a  more  inclusive 
perspective on reflection.    

the  processes 

involved 

REFLECTION SUPPORT 
Reflection takes time and for many people it does not  come 
naturally,  they  usually  need  a  reason  to  reflect  or  at  least 
encouragement to do so [8]. An overview of different ways 
of  supporting  reflection  can  be  given  by  domain  [3]  or 
sorted  by  level  of  reflection  [8].  In  stead,  we  provide  an 
overview  based  on 
to  support 
reflection.  We  were  interested  in  strategies  currently 
adopted, both within and outside of HCI. Based on a broad 
review  of  methods  and  tools  in  different  fields  including 
personal  informatics,  HCI,  therapy  and  education  we 
describe  three  main  strategies  to  stimulate  reflection.  We 
emphasize  that  this  is  not  a  complete  overview  of  all 
possible  strategies,  but  a  summary  of  the  most  recurring 
strategies in our literature review.   

the  adopted  strategy 

Dialogue driven reflection  
Reflection often occurs in dialogue, this is most evident in 
therapists dialogues or teacher-students dialogues. We refer 
here specifically to verbalized dialogue, either in writing or 
spoken,  rather  than  the  more  abstract  notion  of  reflective 
conversation  with  ‘material’  as  Schön  introduced  [21].  In 
dialogue driven reflection, questions or explicit prompts are 
used  to  encourage  reflection.  Within  therapy  or  education 
such a dialogue is often done between “uneven partners” in 
which one takes the lead but people also reflect with friends 
or peers in group sessions [20]. In relation to HCI, dialogue 
driven reflection can be about a design [2] or mediated by a 

54

system.  A  combination  of  both  is  seen  in  the  design  of 
Loversbox  [26].  In  this  design  people  can  create  messages 
for their partner (dialogue mediate by the system), talk with 
an  artist  to  create  these  message  (reflection  about  the 
system) and can reflect together triggered by the system.  

Examples  in  which  the  system  takes  the  leading  role  by 
asking  questions  can  be  seen  in  Echo  [11]  and  the  use  of 
experience tags in photos with Storytellr [14] in which the 
system poses questions such as “how do you feel?” “What 
theme  do  you  associate  with  this  event?”.    Such  questions 
create  a  dialogue  between  system  and  user,  however, 
dialogue often holds after an initial question, an intelligent 
system  would  engage  further  in  dialogue  driven  reflection 
by posing follow-up questions.   

Information driven reflection  
Presenting data can be a trigger for reflection, at least it is a 
premises  often  seen  in  personal  informatics  and  quantified 
self movement. Data can be very helpful when reflection is 
aimed  at  uncovering  patterns  or  for  reflection  aimed  at 
behavior  change.  Different  characteristics  of  information 
are  used  to  stimulate  reflection:  invisibility,  comparison, 
ambiguity  or  multiple  views.  Information  driven  reflection 
is  effective  when  revealing  information  that  is  otherwise 
invisible or cannot be directly observed, such as steps taken 
during  the  day  [e.g.  7].  Data  Souvernirs  [1]  for  instance, 
reveals  ‘hidden’  digital  data  in  the  physical  world  to 
stimulate reflection. Sometimes data is presented in specific 
way,  for  instance  to  allow  for  comparison  (cf.  comparing 
neighborhood  energy  consumption  in  RevealIt,  [28])  For 
these  types  of  applications  clarity  of  information  is 
important. The opposite effect is seen in other cases, where 
the  ambiguity  of  the  data  triggers  reflection  (cf.  History 
tablecloth  [10]).  Finally,  information  driven  reflection  can 
be  supported  by  providing  multiple  views  on  the  data  to 
enable  exploration,  for  instance  of  personal  memory 
artifacts in MemoryLane [12] or the design process in Freed 
[17].  These  examples  show  the  diversity  of  potential 
applications  of  information  driven  reflection  and  the 
important  role  the  systems  and  interactions  play  in  this. 
Many  of  these  are  more  goal-oriented  types  of  reflection, 
with  the  use  of  Sensecam  images  [16]  explored  reflection 
with  a  more  open  approach.  When  reviewing  Sensecam 
images,  participants  for  instance  reflected  on  their  social 
interactions or on incremental change over a long period of 
time.  

Expression driven reflection 
Reflection can be an internal process, but can also be based 
on  externalizing  thoughts  and  feelings.  In  diaries  and  in 
reflective  writing  the  reflection  occurs  while  striving  to 
express oneself. Expression driven reflection is traditionally 
seen  in  personal  diary  writing,  which  Travers  [27]  even 
considers  as 
in 
therapeutic writing [29] or in more creative areas such as art 
therapy  [6].  Orland-Barak  [20]  have  explored  expression 
driven reflection as part of a portfolio in teacher education, 

form  of  self-reflection, 

the  purest 

 
 
Share, Show And Tell

TEI 2016, February 14-17, 2016, Eindhoven, the Netherlands

however  portfolios  were  dominantly  descriptive  and 
emotional rather than showing critical reflection. Additional 
guidance  on  what  to  reflect  upon  could  help.  Such  a  more 
guided  approach  to  expression  driven  reflection  was 
explored  by  Andre  et  al.  [2].  They  designed  expressive 
avatars,  in  which  busyness,  stress,  health  and  engagement 
can  be  expressed.  These  choices  require  reflections  and  as 
such stimulates to reflect on our well-being.  

DESIGN PROCESS   
By  looking  at  this  variety  of  examples  of  supporting 
reflection  we  see  a  gap  in  concepts  that  support  everyday 
life reflection. In many existing concepts  we see that a very 
specific subject is reflected upon, for instance energy usage 
[28],  movement  or  professional  development  [20].  In  our 
definition  of  everyday  life  reflection  we  focus  on  a  broad 
set  of  past,  present  and  future  experiences,  leading  to  a 
more holistic type of reflection. Based on Staudinger’s [24] 
view  of  life  reflection  we  see  everyday  life  reflection  as  a 
process of looking for connections across domains with the 
possibility  to  reflect  on  deeper  beliefs  or  presuppositions 
[18]. This is a highly individual and personal process and to 
allow for this requires a certain openness in our designs.  

Inspired by the work by Gaver [9] we set out to develop a 
set  of  alternatives  to  describe  this  design  space.  These 
concepts  were  developed  iteratively.  First  ideas  were 
individually  generated  by  the  first  author  and  coded  for 
their  potential  values.  After  that  a  brainstorm  with  three 
colleagues  aimed  at  maximizing  and  minimalizing  these 
concepts,  looking  for  the  boundaries  of  their  potential. 
Because  these  concepts  were  highly  influence  by  the 
researchers  original  ideas  and  direction,  a  third  brainstorm 
was a set up to more broadly generate ideas. A definition or 
goal  of  reflection  was  deliberately  not  discussed  with  the 
four  researchers  involved  in  this  brainstorm.  Together, 
these  workshops  resulted  in  a  set  of  48  ideas.  The  results 
were analyzed in a group discussion by comparing them to 
the strategies found in literature, consequently also refining 
these  strategies  (resulting  in  the  three  presented  before). 
Through  these  brainstorms  and  discussions  a  set  of  25 
concepts  was  developed.  In  this  paper  we  present  a 
selection of these to illustrate what insights we gained from 
this  process.  Specifically,  reflection  on  our  concepts  gave 
insight in the roles we see systems can take. We hope that 
both the emerging design space and the individual concepts 
can inspire to look at design for reflection differently.  

DESIGN SPACE 
Reflection  is  often  done  with  someone  else,  who  takes  a 
supporting  role  (a  tutor,  psychologist  or  peer).  In  the 
personal  context  of  everyday  life  reflection,  systems  can 
take  this  role  of  a  “reflection  partner”  in  various  ways. 
Systems  can  trigger  reflection,  support  the  process  of 
reflection  or  enable  capturing  reflections.  These  roles  can 
not  be  completely  separated  and  a  systems  can  adopt 
different roles at different moments in the process.    

Datazen 
A small zen-inspired garden used as an ambient display. Through 
vibration  in  the  bottom,  patterns  in  the  sand  are  created  that  are 
based on measurements of activity, stress and wellbeing (based on 
wearables). You can choose to edit, disturb or change the display 
which is done through the relaxing strength of a zen garden.  

Balance  
A wooden balance that functions as a subtle display of the balance 
in your life as it stores your thoughts on its positive and negative 
sides. You can tap to record on either side, adding weight to that 
side. A physical trigger, an abstract representation of state and an 
achieve of previous thoughts.  

MirrorMirror 
The bathroom is a typical place to start and end a day. In a 
moment that we look at ourselves, MirrorMirror stimulates to look 
at our selves in a more reflective way. To take a moment to 
consider the day, the week or ourselves. Contours of hands trigger 
to stand still a moment. When hands are placed on plaque, the 
mirror slowly starts to draw an outline around you. Takes 3 
minutes to make outline, take time to reflect during this time. 

Figure 1. Concepts with (a) content triggers, (b) direction 
triggers and (c) opportunity triggers 

55

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Share, Show And Tell

TEI 2016, February 14-17, 2016, Eindhoven, the Netherlands

Triggering Role 
Similar  to  how  a  comment  or  question  from  a  friend  gets 
you  thinking,  an  interactive  system  can  take  a  triggering 
role.  Based  on  our  concepts,  we  identity  different  types  of 
triggers that a system can provide. Content triggers provide 
direction  for  what  to  reflection  on,  for  instance  by 
presenting  data  or  media.  To  stimulate  everyday  life 
reflection we focus on presenting data from a broad range. 
However,  peoples  self-image  can  be  conflicting  with  the 
image presented through data. The concept DataZen (Figure 
1a)  therefor  allows  people  to  adjust  the  pattern  presented 
based  on  their  personal  view  on  how  the  data  should 
represent  their  present  or  preferred  future.  The  notion  of 
breakdown [4] or the ambiguous visualization of data (e.g. 
[8]) can also be seen as content triggers.  Being more open 
than  content  triggers,  direction  triggers  give  a  suggestion 
for the type of reflection without limiting the content of the 
reflection.  The  Balance  concept  (Figure  1b)  for  instance 
suggest  to  reflect  on  two  sides  of  a  situation  (e.g.  positive 
and negative) without prescribing what this situation should 
be.  The  most  openness 
that 
provide opportunity trigger. Concepts such as MirrorMirror 
(Figure  1c)  indicate  that  there  is  (or  could  be)  time  and 
space for reflection, without giving any further direction.   

in  systems 

is  seen 

OddOneOut  
A  short  moment  on  the  couch  playing  a  nice  little  game  you’re 
your  pictures.  The  game  of  “odd  one  out”  stimulates  looking  at 
hidden  similarities  and  differences  between  random  photos  from 
your personal past. With all associations, a growing web of related 
photos is created which can be reviewed and explored. 

Supporting Role 
Technologies for everyday life reflection can be designed to 
provide  support  in  the  process  of  reflection.  This  can  be 
done both after a person has been triggered by the system, 
or  if  reflection  is  initiated  by  the  person.  Support  can  for 
instance  be  given  by  exploring  layers  in  system-collected 
data,  step  by  step  (lifeTree  concept  Figure  2)  or  exploring 
user  generated  media  in  a  more  playful  way  (oddOneOut, 
Figure  3a).  Rather  than  free  exploration  MixedEmotions 
(Figure  3b)  stimulate  reflection  by  supporting  a  process  of 
guided choices. The process of MixedEmotions can be seen 
as an example of embodied questions.  

MixedEmotions  
Every  day  is  a  mix  of  experiences  and  emotions,  but  at  night  we 
need to let them go. MixedEmotions creates a night time ritual that 
is relaxing and supports a good night sleep. Mixing a herbal mix 
every  night,  stimulates  reflection  each  bottle  representing  an 
emotion.  How  did  your  day  taste?  Which  bottle  empties  the 
quickest? 

Life Tree  
A beautiful piece of art on the wall in your house, with a hidden 
meaning. As the patterns represent patterns in your live visualizing 
activity, social engagement, stress and health. The interactive art 
piece allows to explore aspects of the data to find peaks, patterns 
or surprises. At the same time it functions as a more peripheral 
trigger for reflection without invading your privacy. 

Figure 2. Concept that support exploration of system 
generated data 

PeelAway 
Getting to the core of a problem can help us gain insight. On each 
segment  of  PeelAway  an  aspect  or  thought  can  be  written  and 
peeled  off,  stimulating  to  write  down  underalying  aspects  and 
explore  underlying  thoughts  or  assumptions,  resulting  in  more 
critical reflection.  

Figure 3. Systems that take a supporting role  

56

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Share, Show And Tell

TEI 2016, February 14-17, 2016, Eindhoven, the Netherlands

Very few of our concepts use explicit, verbalized questions, 
in  contrast  to  some  of  the  dialogue  driven  reflection 
systems  discussed  before  [11,  14].  In  stead,  we  see 
opportunity  for  concepts  that  use  more  subtle  prompt  and 
embodied  questions.  This  can  be  seen  in  the  concept 
‘PeelAway’  (Figure  3c)  which  uses  the  embodiment  of 
layers to dig deeper into underlying aspects of a thought or 
problem. PeelAway supports reflection not only through an 
embodied  question  but  also  through  physical  action.  The 
action  of  peeling  away,  or  in  the  Fragile  Worries  (Figure 
4a)  concept  breaking  figures  is  supportive  of  the  cognitive 
an ungraspable process of reflection. 

Finally,  the  most  subtle  form  of  support,  is  seen  in 
providing environment support. After being initiated by the 
user,  PastScape  (Figure  4b)  creates  en  environment  for 
reflection by creating a metaphorical distance from current 
activities to allow for reflection. After being initiated by the 
user,  PastScape  creates  en  environment  for  reflection  by 
creating  a  metaphorical  distance  from  current  activities  to 
allow for reflection. ungraspable process of reflection.  

our 

Capturing Role 
Rather  than  triggering  to  start  reflection,  systems  can 
support  closing  the  process  of  reflection  by  supporting 
externalization.  Capturing 
through 
externalization  has  two  important  benefits.  First  of  all, 
externalizing  thoughts  can  help  to  bring  peace  of  mind,  a 
focus  in  FragileWorries  (Figure  4a).  Secondly,  capturing 
reflections  can  serve  as  content  triggers  in  the  future.  The 
Trail Concept (Figure 4c), allows people to leave reflective 
messages  in  specific  locations.  Similar  to  Echoes  [11]  a 
collection of responses to earlier reflections could emerge. 

reflections 

the 

Dimensions of a Design Space 
In 
introduction  we  presented  multiple  strategies: 
expression, information or dialogue driven reflection. From 
our  open  brainstorm  multiple  roles  emerged.  Some  roles 
map  easily  to  certain  strategies,  see  Figure  6:  information 
often  takes  a  triggering  role,  systems  supporting  capturing 
can  rely  on  expression  driven  reflection  and  dialogue  is  a 
strong  form  of  support.  However,  all  other  combinations 
spark  useful  insight  as  well,  in  Figure  5  we  have  mapped 
our  concepts  to  this  design  space,  this  shows  how  several 
concepts change roles during the process: the visual aspects 
of LifeTree provide content triggers, but the opportunity to 
explore the layers of data behind this provide support. The 
Balance  concept  shifts  through  all  roles:  the  physical  form 
and  current  status  trigger  to  reflect,  the  interactivity  that 
changes 
from  multiple 
perspectives and finally the recorded messages are captured 
and  can  be  later  reviewed.  Mapping  our  concepts  to  these 
dimensions,  also  lead  to  defining  a  fourth  dimension: 
environment  driven  reflection  (see  Figure  6).  This  strategy 
focuses  on  creating  contextual  elements  that  are  beneficial 
for  reflection,  which  could  draw  on  notions  of  restorative 
environments [1].  

the  scale  support 

reflecting 

FragileWorries 
A  set  of  abstract  ceramic  figures  in  which  can  be  written  upon. 
Write  worries  down  and  break  them  to  let  go  or  show  how 
vulnerable worries are. Shards can be saved as a reminder of past 
struggles or disposed of to truly get rid of the past. 

PastScape 
Hear a soundscape from the past, connected to the location you are 
in. Scroll through the decades,  was there a city here? Do you here 
cars or horses? Provides opportunity to get away from the present, 
get to a different place, see things in a different perspective 

Trail  
Reflection  often  requires  getting  away  from  everyday  life 
activites, for instance with a small stroll. With Trail you can save 
thoughts  or  reflection  on  specific  locations,  creating  your  own 
garden of thought to which you can return for future deliberation. 
Creating not only an environment, but personal messages to your 
future self. 

Figure 4: System that support capturing reflection (a, c) or 
provide an environment for reflection (b, c)  

57

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Share, Show And Tell

TEI 2016, February 14-17, 2016, Eindhoven, the Netherlands

approach.  We  have  build  upon  work  by  [3,  4,  8,  25]  to 
provide  specific  dimensions  aiming  to  give  more  direct 
suggestions for design. Although these dimensions might be 
useful  for  any  type  of  reflection,  we  specifically  aim  at 
everyday  life  reflection  focusing  on  insight  (rather  than 
behavior change or skill-development). Based on our work 
we discuss three other elements that are import specifically 
for  this  type  of  reflection:  holistic  reflection,  openness  in 
design and embedding in everyday life. 

Holistic reflection 
Most of our concepts do not focus on a specific behavior or 
domain.  We  see  the  biggest  benefit  for  everyday  life 
reflection  if  different  experiences,  life  aspects  or  domains 
can  be  combined.  Systems  that  use  content-triggers  often 
provide  focus,  but  therefor  also  limit  our  reflections.  The 
OddOneOut  concept  uses  a  very  diverse  set  of  input,  by 
reflecting  on  the  similarities  and  differences  between 
media, more abstract insights can be generated.  

Openness in Design 
Because of the personal and holistic nature of everyday life 
reflections,  designing  for  it  should  be  approached  with  a 
high  degree  of  openness.  In  our  concept  openness  is  seen 
for  instance  in  the  use  of  direction  or  opportunity  triggers. 
We focus on designs that allow to be appropriated and that 
allow for interpretation, making meaning through use [23]. 
The game of OddOneOut for instance, has no specific goal 
and its meaning or benefits can only be interpreted through 
use.  The  Balance  concept  is  an  example  that  can  be  easily 
appropriated  to  use  for  different  types  of  life  balances 
(positive & negative, work & leisure).  

Integrating Reflection in Everyday life  
Reflection  requires  time,  structure  and  encouragement  [8]. 
For systems to contribute to these elements, they need to be 
integrated  in  everyday  life.  For  everyday  life  reflection  to 
truly improve reflection it needs to become a habit adopted 
over  a  long  period  of  time.  Integrating  systems  for 
reflection  in  everyday  life  in  a  meaningful  way  is  very 
challenging.  Echo  [11]  for  example  is  a  concept  strong  in 
all roles of triggering, supporting and capturing, however it 
is less integrated in everyday life. Echo triggers at random 
moments, which leads to surprising entries, but can also be 
very  disturbing.  There  are  many  moments  during  the  day 
when  the  resources  for  reflection  (time,  mental  effort, 
isolation)  are  not  available.  Allowing  for  better  integration 
into everyday life can be done in several ways.   

Everyday Life Rituals  
Reflection requires time and attention and the skill to reflect 
develops  over  time.  Concepts  such  as  Balance  recognize 
this and aim to create a new ritual for daily reflection, with 
a  fixed  location  and  timing,  for  instance  when  coming 
home.  Other  concepts 
in  current 
everyday  life  rituals  (MirrorMirror),  reducing  the  effort 
required  to  adopt  the  new  habit.  In  OddOneOut,  we  we 
adopt  a  more  flexible  approach  and  aim  to  “lighten”  the 
process of reflection by game elements.  

integrate  reflection 

Figure 5: Mapping conceptual reflection systems in emerging 
design space 

Defining  the  space  across  these  two  dimensions  has 
contributed  to  our  design  process  and  understanding  in 
several ways. First, we can use the space to analyze current 
strategies  and  can  use  this  to  compare  concepts  in  a 
structured  way.  Secondly,  it  allows  to  redesign  reflection 
systems: for example a regular diary is based on capturing 
expression  driven  reflection  (top  right  corner),  but  can  be 
redesigned  to  include  dialogue  driven  triggers,  see  for 
example  the  physical  diary  by  Mols  &  Markopoulos  [19], 
the  redesign  is  indicated  in  Figure  6.  Thirdly,  the  two 
dimensions illustrate opportunities within the design space. 
The visual for instance triggered the question how we might 
design  for  expression  driven  triggering.  This  lead  to  the 
idea of a “ThoughtsCanvas”: an empty canvas that triggers 
to express, but fades after a night sleep, leaving no trace. In 
this  way,  the  entry  can  not  be  revisited  and  the  trigger 
remains  open,  which  positions  the  concept  in  the  top  left 
corner.  

DISCUSSION  
We  have  presented  this  design  space  as  inspiration  and 
to  potential  future  work  on 
guide,  giving  direction 
supporting reflection with a more holistic and open  

Figure 6: Design spaced used to define opportunities for 
design, redesign and new strategies  

58

 
 
 
 
Share, Show And Tell

TEI 2016, February 14-17, 2016, Eindhoven, the Netherlands

Layers 
Enabling  embedding  reflection  in  everyday  life  is  also 
achieved  by  designing  for 
the  different  ‘layers’  of 
reflection. As described by Fleck, R., & Fitzpatrick [8] and 
Kember  et  al.  [13]  reflection  on  the  deepest  layers  are  not 
always  necessary.  In  stead,  concepts  can  support  multiple 
laywers,  by  allowing  for  both  reflective  descriptions  or 
comparison  (first  layers)  as  well  as  more  critical  or 
transformative  reflection  on  a  deeper  layer  [8].  Such 
designs will allow for short moments of interaction as well 
as  for  more  time-consuming  and  deliberate  reflection  (for 
critical  or  transformative  reflection).  E.g.  adding  a  note  to 
the  Balance  concept  is  a  small  moment  of  insight,  but 
reviewing  past  balances  and  their  potential  pattern  over 
time  is  on  a  deeper  layer.  Although  interactive  systems 
might be most suitable to stimulate more descriptive levels 
of reflection [8], we can combine these layers with different 
interaction styles to support more critical reflection.  

Social Roles 
In  our  design  space  we  focused  on  systems  that  take  the 
role of a reflective partner, allowing users to engage with a 
dialogue  with  themselves  [5].  However  we  could  also 
imagine  systems  that  mediate  or  support  reflection  with  a 
partner.  Although  not  explicitly  designed  for  this  purpose, 
several  concept  can  stimulate  reflective  conversation 
through  their  presence  in  the  home  environment.  The 
abstract  representation  in  concepts  such  as  LifeTree  or 
Balance allow for responses from close ones when meaning 
is  shared.  E.g.  partners 
together  can  start  a 
conversation  if  they  see  much  has  been  added  to  the 
Balance. One could even use such a system together rather 
than  individually.  At  the  same  time,  Balance  takes  the 
privacy  of  reflection  into  account,  for  people  not  informed 
about  the  meaning,  it  remains  an  abstract  sculpture. 
Including  intimate  others  in  the  process  of  reflection  can 
support integrating reflection in everyday life.  

living 

Reflecting on the process 
Concepts  were  generated  iteratively,  with  different  people 
involved  in  different  phases.  Iterations  have  shaped  the 
design space, as have our discussions and analysis. From a 
critical  perspective  we  should  recognize  that  most  of  the 
involved  researchers  have  been  …  in  a  reflection-driven 
educational  system  and  therefor  all  have  quite  a  reflective 
attitude. Therefore, similar to [3] our work is based on the 
premises that people benefit from reflection and focused on 
people willing to engage in reflection. We do not focus on a 
persuasive  approach  but  rather  focus  on  empower  people 
with  the  desire  to  reflect  more  often  but  who  can  use 
support.  

Although  we  have  strived  to  make  both  dimensions  of 
strategies  and  roles  as  specific  as  possible,  they  still  on  a 
conceptual  level.  The  see  the  design  space  “not  as  a 
problem space, but as a complex situation in which we pose 
interventions  [4],  which  can  help  us  to  better  understand 
reflection  itself.  The  value  of  these  concepts  can  only 

become clear in use, through a process of meaning making, 
the  concepts  have  been  designed  to  allow  for  multiple 
meanings. [23]. However this also means that, in use, they 
might be used more pragmatically or functional rather than 
reflective.  Only  long  term  evaluations  in  real  can  uncover 
the reflective potential of these concepts.   

CONCLUSION 
Reflection  can  have  many  benefits  and  is  a  topic  of  great 
interest  within  HCI  and  personal  informatics.  However, 
most  current  work  is  focused  on  supporting  reflection  on 
specific aspects. Instead, in this paper we have illustrated a 
direction  focusing  on  everyday  life  reflection  with  more 
holistic  and  open  approach.  We  presented  a  design  space 
illustrated  with  several  concepts.  By  combining 
the 
supporting  roles  a  system  can  take  and  different  strategies 
to drive reflection we hope to inspire future work everyday 
life reflection.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  would  like  to  thank  our  colleagues  at  the  UCE  group 
(TU/e)  and  the  MM  team  for  their  participation  in  the 
brainstorms  and  discussions  presented  in  this  paper.  This 
research  was  supported  by  STW  VIDI  grant  number 
for 
016.128.303  of  The  Netherlands  Organization 
ScienticResearch (NWO), awarded to Elise van den Hoven. 
All images modified by first authors, the following images 
are  used  under  CC0  license:  Figures  1a,  1b,  3a,  3b,  4a,  4b 
and 4c. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Ryan Aipperspach, Ben Hooker, and Allison 

Woodruff. 2011. Data Souvenirs: Environmental 
psychology and reflective design. International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies 69, 5: 338-349. 

2.  Paul André, M.C. Schraefel, Alan Dix, and Ryen W.  
White. 2011. Expressing well-being online: towards 
self-reflection and social awareness. In Proceedings of 
the 2011 iConference, 114-121 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1940761.1940777 

3.  Eric P.S. Baumer, Vera Khovanskaya, Mark Matthews, 

Lindsay Reynolds, Victoria Schwanda Sosik and Geri 
Gay. 2014. Reviewing reflection: On the use of 
reflection in interactive system design. In Proceedings 
of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive 
systems (DIS’14) 93-102. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2598510.2598598 

4.  Eris P.S. Baumer. 2015. Reflective Informatics: 

Conceptual Dimensions for Designing Technologies of 
Reflection. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI’15) 585-594 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2598510.2598598 

5.  Travis J. Brown. 2009. Self informatics: considerations 

for designing technology which supports user 
reflection. Published as part of CHI’09 workshop 
Designing for reflection on experience 

59

 
 
Share, Show And Tell

TEI 2016, February 14-17, 2016, Eindhoven, the Netherlands

6.  Kate Collie, Joan L. Bottorff, and Bonita C. Long. 

2006. A narrative view of art therapy and art making 
by women with breast cancer. Journal of Health 
Psychology 11, 5: 761-775. 

7.  Sunny Consolvo, Katherine Everitt, Ian Smith and 

James A. Landay. 2006. Design requirements for 
technologies that encourage physical activity. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human 
Factors in computing systems (CHI’06) 457-466. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124840 

8.  Rowanne Fleck and Gerladine Fitzpatrick. 2010. 

Reflecting on reflection: framing a design landscape. In 
Proc. Of the 22nd Conference of the Computer-Human 
Interaction Special Interest Group of Australia on 
Computer-Human Interaction (OZCHI’10) 216-223 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1952222.1952269 

Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’10) 557-566. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753409 

16.  Sian E. Lindley, Maxine Glancy, Richard Harper, Dave  
Randall and Nicola Smyth. 2011. “Oh and how things 
just don't change, the more things stay the same”: 
Reflections on SenseCam images 18 months after 
capture. International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, 69, 5: 311-323. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2010.12.010 

17.  Phillip Mendels, Joep Frens and Kees Overbeeke. 

2011. Freed: a system for creating multiple views of a 
digital collection during the design process. In 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’11) 1481-1490. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979160 

18.  Jack Mezirow. 1991. Transformative dimensions of 

9.  Bill Gaver and Heather Martin. 2000 Alternatives: 

adult learning. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco 

exploring information appliances through conceptual 
design proposals. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI’00) 209-216 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/332040.332433 

10.  William Gaver, John Bowers, Andy Boucher, Andy 

Law, Sarah Pennington, and Nicholas Villar. 2006. The 
history tablecloth: illuminating domestic activity. 
In Proceedings of the 6th conference on Designing 
Interactive Systems (DIS’06) 199-208 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1142405.1142437 

11.  Ellen Isaacs, Artie Konrad, Alan Walendowski, 

Thomas Lennig, Victoria Hollis and Steve Whittaker. 
2013. Echoes from the past: how technology mediated 
reflection improves well-being. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI’13) 1071-1080 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466137 

12.  Vaiva Kalnikaitė and Steve Whittaker. 2011. A saunter 
down memory lane: Digital reflection on personal 
mementos. International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, 69, 5: 298-310 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2010.12.004 

13.  David Kember, Doris Y. P. Leung, Alice Jones, Alice 
Yuen Loke, Jan McKay, Kit Sinclair, Harrison Tse, 
Celia Webb, Frances Kam Yuet Wong, Marian Wong 
and Ella Yeung. 2000. Development of a questionnaire 
to measure the level of reflective thinking. Assessment 
& evaluation in higher education, 25, 4: 381-395. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/713611442 

14.  Brian M. Landry. 2009 Designing for Personal 

Reflection: The Role of Reflection in Photo-Based 
Communication Published as part of CHI’09 workshop 
Designing for reflection on experience 

15.  Ian Li, Anind Dey and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A stage-
based model of personal informatics systems. In 
Procedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 

19.  Ine Mols and Panos Markopoulos. 2012. Dear Diary: A 
Design Exploration on Motivating Reflective Diary 
Writing. Persuasive Technology, 29. 

20.  Lily Orland-Barak. 2005. Portfolios as evidence of 

reflective practice: What remains ‘untold’. Educational 
research. 47, 1: 25-44. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0013188042000337541  

21.  Donald A. Schön. 1983. The Reflective Practitioner: 

How Professionals Think in Action. New York: Basic 
Books 

22.  Phoebe Sengers, Kirsten Boehner, Shay David and 

Joseph ‘Jofish’ Kaye. 2005. Reflective design. In 
Proceedings of the 4th decennial conference on 
Critical computing: between sense and sensibility. 49-
58. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1094562.1094569 

23.  Phoebe Sengers and Bill Gaver. 2006. Staying open to 

interpretation: engaging multiple meanings in design 
and evaluation. In Proceedings of the 6th conference 
on Designing Interactive systems (DIS’06) 99-108 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1142405.1142422 

24.  Ursula M. Staudinger. 2001. Life reflection: A social–

cognitive analysis of life review. Review of General 
Psychology, 5, 2: 148-160. 
http://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/1089-2680.5.2.148 

25.  Josephine Tchetagni, Roger Nkambou and Jacqueline  
Bourdeau. 2007. Explicit reflection in prolog-tutor. 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in 
Education (IJAIED). 17: 169-215. 

26.  Anja Thieme, Jayne Wallace, James Thomas, Ko Le 
Chen, Nicole Krämer and Patrick Olivier. 2011. 
Lovers' box: Designing for reflection within romantic 
relationships. International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies. 69, 5: 283-297. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2010.12.006 

60

 
 
Share, Show And Tell

TEI 2016, February 14-17, 2016, Eindhoven, the Netherlands

27.  Cheryl Travers. 2011. Unveiling a reflective diary 

methodology for exploring the lived experiences of 
stress and coping. Journal of Vocational Behavior. 79, 
1: 204-216. 

28.  Nina Valkanova, Sergi Jorda, Martin Tomitsch and 

Andrew Vande Moere. 2013. Reveal-it!: the impact of 
a social visualization projection on public awareness 
and discourse. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 

Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI’13) 3461-3470 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466476 

29.  Jeannie Wright and Man Chung. 2001. Mastery or 
mystery? Therapeutic writing: A review of the 
literature. British Journal of Guidance and 
Counselling. 29, 3: 277-291

61

 
 
 
