The Power of Mobile Notifications to Increase  
Wellbeing Logging Behavior 

Frank Bentley 
Motorola Mobility 
Libertyville, IL USA 
f.bentley@motorola.com 

Konrad Tollmar 
Royal Institute of Technology, MSL / COS / ICT 
Kista, Sweden 
konrad@kth.se 

ABSTRACT 
Self-logging  is  a  critical  component  to  many  wellbeing 
systems.  However,  self-logging  often  is  difficult  to  sustain 
at  regular  intervals  over  many  weeks.  We  demonstrate  the 
power of passive mobile notifications to increase logging of 
wellbeing data, particularly food intake, in a mobile health 
service.  Adding  notifications  increased  the  frequency  of 
logging  from  12%  in  a  one-month,  ten-user  pilot  study 
without  reminders  to  63%  in  the  full  60-user  study  with 
reminders included. We will discuss the benefits of passive 
notifications over existing interruptive methods. 

Author Keywords 
Mobile; Notifications; Behavior Change; Wellbeing; 
Logging; Personal Informatics 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous.  

General Terms 
Human Factors; Design; Measurement.  

INTRODUCTION 
There is currently a growing crisis in wellbeing throughout 
the  world.  In  the  United  States,  over  one  third  of  the 
population  is  obese  [3],  with  numbers  continuing  to  grow. 
Other  countries,  especially  in  Europe,  are  seeing  similar 
trends [2].  

Many  see  mobile  devices  as  the  key  to  helping  people 
discover  long-term  trends  in  potentially  harmful  behaviors 
and  assisting  in  behavior  changes  to  increase  wellbeing. 
Mobile  phones  can  sense  much  of  a  person’s  context  as 
well  as  provide  an  easy  means  to  support  self-logging. 
Mobile  phones  also  have  the  power  to  notify  users  and 
provide nudges to perform a particular behavior. 

Collecting  individual  sensor  data  such  as  step  count  or 
weight  might  show  a  change  in  that  one  aspect  over  time, 
however it does not show users what is causing that change. 
We  have  found  great  benefit  in  combining  multiple  sensor 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
CHI 2013, April 27–May 2, 2013, Paris, France. 
Copyright © 2013 ACM  978-1-4503-1899-0/13/04...$15.00. 

[14], 

together 

finding 
and  contextual  data  streams 
significant  correlations  in  these  data  streams  over  weeks 
and  months,  and  presenting  these  observations  directly  to 
users  in  natural  language  feeds.  This  allows  people  to 
answer basic questions about their wellbeing. They can see 
feed  items  on  long-term  and  periodic  trends  such  as  “You 
gain weight on Sundays,” “You eat more on days when you 
walk less,” or “You are happier on days when it’s colder.” 

But  calculating  these  correlations  relies  on  having  a 
significant  amount  of  data  for  each  sensor  stream.  In 
addition, the data from multiple sensors has to be supplied 
on the same day in order to make a correlation, so it is of no 
use  if  a  user  only  decides  to  log  sleep  on  Mondays  and 
Tuesdays  but  then  logs  their  mood  on  Fridays  and 
Saturdays. Therefore, we need a way to encourage users to 
log data for each sensor stream as often as possible. 

While some logging can easily be automatic (e.g. location, 
weather,  calendar  data,  etc.),  some  by  definition  require 
self-logging.  Food  intake,  pain  levels,  and  mood  are 
examples that are quite difficult to automatically determine, 
but  can  be  quite  easy  for  users  to  enter  on  their  own. 
However, in practice, people tend to forget and/or lack the 
motivation to self-log. In this paper, we will we show how 
simple status-bar reminders on a mobile phone can increase 
self-logging frequency by a factor of five. 

RELATED WORK 
Mobile  phones  and  self-logging  have  been  the  focus  of 
many  research  programs  over  the  past  decade.  Main 
research  threads  have  explored  using  automatic  context 
logging  on  the  phone,  allowing  manual  entry  of  activity, 
and the logging of food throughout the day. 

Many of the food studies have focused on logging specific 
individual items that are eaten (e.g. [12]). This can be quite 
burdensome,  as  unless  one  eats  fast  food  or  pre-packaged 
frozen  meals,  entering  every  ingredient  in  the  appropriate 
quantity for each meal can be overwhelming. Work on the 
PmEB  [13]  system  demonstrated 
text  message 
reminders  can  encourage  people  to  perform  detailed  food 
logging.  However,  in  this  work  participants  were  told  that 
they  had  to  log  each  day  to  be  “compliant”  with  the  study 
and  reported  not  liking  the  disruptive  nature  of  the  SMS 
reminders.  Participants  in  the  PmEB  study  also  expressed 
frustration  over  the  lack  of  particular  food  items  in  the 
database.  Given  this,  we  chose  a  much  simpler  relative 
logging  method  as  described  in  the  next  section  which  is 

that 

Session: Technologies for Life 2CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France1095 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: The pilot system provided mashups observations 
in a widget on the homescreen as well as on a mobile 
website. Manual logging of food and exercise was 
accomplished via another widget, which opened the logging 
screen on the right. 

similar  to  [10]  in  that  it  tracks  relative  amounts  of  food 
instead  of  specific  food  items  and  calories,  which  are 
notoriously hard to track accurately (e.g. [11]). 

BJ Fogg writes about behavior triggers that can be the spark 
needed  to  remind  users  to  do  a  task  that  is  simple  and 
within  their  ability  [5].  Fogg  primarily  focused  on  SMS 
messages for reminders as they were pervasive at the time 
on  all  mobile  devices.  More  on  SMS  reminders  can  be 
found  in  the  edited  volume  [6].  These  systems  used  active 
notifications that would ring or vibrate the phone in order to 
get the user’s attention.  We were interested in more passive 
notifications  and to  measure  how  notificatio ns  influence 
logging frequency which is missing from related work. 

[7]  demonstrated 

In the fields of social psychology and preventive medicine, 
Emmons  &  McCullough 
in  an 
experimental study that persons who kept gratitude journals 
on a weekly basis exercised more regularly, reported fewer 
physical symptoms, felt better about their lives as a whole, 
and were more optimistic about the upcoming week. Kahn 
et  al.  [8]  highlight 
that 
contextual  and  behavioral  data  have  with  each  other,  and 
found  that  many  sources  of  methods  and  information  need 
to  come  together  more  effectively  to  create  positive 
behavior  changes.  This  is  the  basis  for  our  system  that 
combines multiple aspects of wellbeing and context. 

the  complex  dependencies 

A  more  complete  analysis  of  mobile  health  and  wellbeing 
solutions can be found in Klasnja and Pratt’s [9] survey. 

THE HEALTH MASHUPS SYSTEM 
Our  pilot  Health  Mashups  system  is  described  further  in 
[14].  In  this  system,  users  were  given  a  Fitbit  to  log  step 
count  and  sleep  as  well  as  a  WiThings  Wi-Fi  scale  to  log 

Figure 2: The reminder notification for food logging in the 
second study. The user could set the time for the reminder 
to appear in the status bar. Clicking on the notification led 
directly to the food logging screen on the right. 

their  weight.  A  mobile  phone  application  automatically 
captured  location  and  calendar  data  and  included  widgets 
on the home screen to manually log food and exercise data 
as shown in Figure 1. 

We will describe the food logging procedure in more detail, 
as  that  is  the  focus  on  this  Note.  At  the  end  of  each  day, 
users  could  click  on  the  logging  widget  on  their  home 
screen to launch a screen that enabled easy logging of food 
and  exercise.  We  chose  a  simple  logging  scheme,  as 
previous  work  with  experience  sampling  has  shown  the 
reliability of small, repeating questions asked over time [1].  
Therefore, we asked participants to log how much they had 
eaten that day and their exercise on a 5-point scale. 

Over many days and weeks of the study, we could then find 
patterns that emerged with just this simple data. Did a user 
tend  to  eat  more  on  the  weekends  versus  weekdays,  did 
they eat more on days when the walked more, etc. As long 
as  users  were  roughly  self-consistent  as  to  the  general 
amount and healthiness of the food they ate, we could make 
our  correlations  without  requiring  tedious  logging  of  each 
food item. Users reported finding this process quite easy on 
a  7-point  scale.  As  described  in  [14],  we  found  several 
statistically significant correlations for each user, mainly on 
the automatically-logged sensors. However, because of the 
general lack of manual logging in this pilot, we were often 
not able to make correlations with food or exercise data. 

After completing the ten user pilot study, we implemented 
several  changes  to  the  system.  We  moved  from  a  mobile 
web  application  to  a  native  application  to  reduce  latency 
and  allow  for  deeper  interaction  with  the  phone  platform. 
We also added a user-configurable reminder system for data 
streams  that  had  to  be  manually  logged,  hoping  to  see 

Session: Technologies for Life 2CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France1096 
 
   
 
  
 
increased  logging  and  thus  the  ability  to  perform  better 
correlations between data streams. 

When  the  user  first  launched  the  updated  application,  in 
addition to syncing their Fitbit and WiThings accounts, they 
were  asked  if  they  would  like  to  log  food,  mood,  or  pain. 
For each that they selected, they could set a time (or times 
for  mood  and  pain)  to  receive  an  Android  notification  to 
remind them to log. Importantly, this notification was non-
interrupting.  It  would  not  ring  or  vibrate  their  phone,  and 
would just put a small icon in the notification tray (the very 
small icon in the upper left of Figure 2) that was mixed with 
other  notifications,  such  as  email,  missed  calls,  etc.  The 
next  time  they  picked  up  their  phone,  they  would  see  the 
icon and could easily pull down the notification tray, click 
on the expanded entry, and be taken straight to the logging 
screen for that sensor as shown in Figure 2. 

In  the  summer  of  2012,  we  conducted  a  study  with  60 
participants  using  this  updated  system.  Both  the  pilot  and 
main studies included participants recruited using the same 
professional  recruiting  firm  with  the  same  screener  and 
began at the same time of year, one year apart. Participants 
in  both  studies  consisted  of  a  broad  range  of  ages, 
occupations, and education levels ranging in age from early 
20s to 60s, and occupations as diverse as policewomen and 
chemists.  

Both  studies 
included  users  with  a  similar  mix  of 
technology 
motivations  for  participating  and  similar 
experience.  In  both  studies,  participants  were  given  the 
same devices (a Fitbit and a WiThings scale) and the same 
instructions  with  regards  to  their  use  (or  non-use)  of  the 
system: That “you should use the application as if you just 
downloaded  it  from  the  app  store.    If  you  do  not  find  it 
useful, there is no obligation to use it and no compensation 
in the study will be tied to your use of the system.”  

FINDINGS 
In our pilot study, the manual food logging was rarely used. 
In  the  first  week,  a  few  users  tried  it  out,  but  after  day 
seven, no more than two out of ten users logged food on the 
same day. After day 12, only one user sporadically logged 
food for the rest of the month as shown in Figure 3. 

This  contrasts  with  the  full  study  with  reminders  enabled 
where 63% of users logged food each day. This percentage 
stayed  quite  consistent  throughout  the  month,  showing  the 
power  of  simple  reminders  to  promote  sustained  logging. 
Logging  behavior  was  also  sustained  in  the  full  trial  with 
numbers between 55-65% in the second month of the trial. 

In  our  surveys  and  interviews  at  the  end  of  the full   study, 
many users reported liking the reminders as they recognized 
how  easy  it  would  be  to  forget  to  log.  Representative 
examples include User 28 from Atlanta, who stated that the 
best  feature  of  the  app  was:  “the  reminder  feature  because 
half the time I forget to login my information.” Also, User 
37  from  Atlanta  told  us,  “I  like  that  it  reminds  me  to  add 

Figure 3: Food logging behavior increased by more than 5x 
in the full study (with reminders) compared to the pilot. 

in  my  notification  bar.  I  would  surely  forget 

info 
otherwise.”  

User 10 from Chicago agrees and points to the importance 
of having a quick action to log: “The online reminders are 
awesome,  makes  it  so  much  easier  to  keep  track  of  stuff 
because I can get absentminded and lose track of what to do 
… The questions are easy to answer and make for a quick Q 
and A.”  In our case, this logging consisted of just a few 7-
point  scales  in  comparison  to  other  food-logging  solutions 
which  require  complex  logging  of  every  food  item  eaten 
that can take ten minutes or more per day.  

Users  were  able  to  set  their  own  times  for  notifications  to 
appear,  and  this  time  became  an  important  moment  for 
reflection. Our participants set a wide variety of times to be 
reminded to log their daily food and expressed how it was 
nice  that  it  could  fit  into  their  schedules.  User  26  from 
Atlanta told us that “it is a good reminder at the end of the 
day to write down what type of food I ate [choosing from a 
7-point  scale  on  how  healthy  food  intake  was  as  shown  in 
Figure 2]. Healthy or not. I guess through the day you can 
sometimes  forget,  but  then  when  it's  time  to  answer  to  the 
app, you have a moment of truth.”  

User 20 from Chicago expanded on this point and spoke of 
the power of logging to increase reflection each day. “I like 
that it asks me to log my food and my mood daily. It makes 
me more conscious of how I'm feeling as well as what I'm 
eating  throughout  the  day.”  The  more  often  someone  logs, 
the more opportunities for reflection they get. 

The  nature  of  the  smart  phone  being  a  device  that  most 
people  use  periodically  throughout  the  day  leads  to  more 
frequent  reminders  about  their  wellbeing.  User  35  from 
Atlanta  told  us:  “My  phone  is  always  with  me  and  in  my 
hands  so  therefore  I  am  constantly  reminded  to  use  the 
app.”  Our  ambient  notifications  indicate  both  the  need  to 
log  and  also  display  the  new  observations  that  are 
calculated in a private manner. No revealing health data is 
ever  shown  “publicly”  on  the  home  screen,  keeping  the 
design recommendations of Consolvo et al [4] in mind. 

Session: Technologies for Life 2CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France1097 
 
This  increased  reflection  each  day  and  increased  data  that 
was provided not only allowed the users to reflect more on 
their  own,  but  provided  for  better  data  analysis.  The  more 
days that have multiple data points logged for a given user, 
the more accurate correlations across sensor streams we can 
provide.  In  the  month  of  our  pilot  study,  users  averaged 
only  a  single  day  that  had  both  Food  and  Weight  logged, 
while in the second study they averaged 9 such days in the 
first  month.  For  the  Steps  and  Food  combination,  users 
averaged  2.6  days  in  the  first  study  and  14.8  days  in  the 
second study. This increased amount of data lead directly to 
the  ability  to  perform  a  statistical  analysis  and  find 
significant correlations between the data streams over time. 
This  was  not  something  that  could  be  reliably  calculated 
between these manually logged sensors in the first study. 

leading 

DISCUSSION 
As  mentioned  above,  increased  frequency  of  behavioral 
data  logging  leads  to  the  ability  to  find  significant  long-
term  trends  in  fewer  weeks  of  use.  Adding  notifications 
improved  logging  frequency  by  over  5x  from  the  pilot 
study.  Beyond 
to  better  personal  analytics, 
increased logging frequency can also be quite useful for use 
with medical practitioners. Having a daily log of pain, food 
intake,  mood,  or  other  data  can  help  doctors  and  nurses  to 
spot  patterns  that  our  algorithms  may  miss.  It  can  give 
doctors the power to see into a patient’s life, and not just a 
snapshot each year when a patient visits for a checkup. This 
data can be extremely important in the case of diabetes and 
other  chronic  conditions.  Often,  manual  logs  for  these 
patients  are  spotty  at  best  and  accurate  logs  of  food,  pain, 
and blood sugar levels can dramatically improve care. 

Status  bar  notifications  are  an  exciting  platform  for  future 
research  and  behavior  change  products.  Unlike  previous 
work  with  text  messages,  mobile  notifications  can  be  non-
interrupting, silently placing an icon in the notification tray 
for later action. They do not ring, do not vibrate, but just sit 
there waiting to be noticed. These notifications do not get in 
the way of current activities but can be attended to the next 
time the user has a few free seconds. They seem to provide 
just enough pressure to encourage action, but not too much 
to  become  annoying  (as  in [13] ).  Sustained  high  logging 
rates continued throughout the 90 days of the full study. 

Based  on  our  findings,  in  order  for  notifications  to  be  the 
most effective over the long-term, they should be: 

•  Non-interrupting: not ringing or vibrating 
•  Followed  with  simple 

logging: 

taking  action  or 

cancelling the notification should be of similar effort 
•  User Configurable: time and frequency of notifications 

set by the user 

We  have  demonstrated  the  ability  for  a  mobile  phone 
notification  to  increase  the  manual  logging  of  food  intake 
from  12%  to  63%,  a  greater  than  5x  improvement. 
Increasing  the  frequency  of  manual  logging  has  the  ability 
to provide much more reliable data in systems that combine 

inputs  from  multiple  sources  as  well  as  serve  as  tools  for 
patients in discussions with medical professionals. There is 
room  for  further  research  on  how  reminders  can  increase 
the quality of analysis within a health monitoring system. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Barrett, L. F., Barrett, D. 2001. An Introduction to 

Computerized Experience Sampling in Psychology. 
Social Science Computer Review, Vol 19, No 2, 175-
185. Sage Publications. 

2.  BUPA. 2011. http://www.bupa.co.uk/individuals/health- 

information/directory/o/child-obesity 

3.  CDC. 2010. U.S. Obesity Trends. 

http://www.cdc.gov/obesity/data/trends.html  

4.  Consolvo, S., Everitt, K., Smith, I., and Landay, J. 2006. 
Design requirements for technologies that encourage 
physical activity. In Proc. CHI '06. 

5.  Fogg, B.J. 2009. A behavior model for persuasive 

design. In Proc Persuasive ‘09. 

6.  Fogg, B.J., and Adler, R. Texting 4 Health: A simple 

powerful way to improve lives. Captology Media. 2009. 
7.  Emmons, R. A., & McCullough, M. E. (2003). Counting 

blessings versus burdens: Experimental studies of 
gratitude and subjective well- being in daily life. Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 377-389. 
8.  Kahn, E.B. et al. The effectiveness of interventions to 

increase physical activity. A systematic review. 
American Journal of Preventive Medicine 22, 73-107 
(2002). 

9.  Klasnja P., Pratt, W. Healthcare in the pocket: Mapping 
the space of mobile-phone health interventions. Journal 
of Biomedical Informatics 45 (2012), p185-198. 

10. Korhonen, I., Salminen, J.H., Ahtinen, A., Koskinen, E., 

Sarela, A., Parkka, J., Lappalainen, R. 2010. 
Empowering Citizens for Well-being and Chronic 
Disease Management With Wellness Diary. IEEE 
Transactions on Information Technology in 
Biomedicine. 14(2), pp 456-463. 

11. Schwartz, J, Byrd-Bredbenner, C. The ability of young 
adults to estimate portion size and calorie content. Top 
Clin Nutr 2006; 21: 114-121.  

12. Siek, K., Connelly, K., Rogers, Y., Rohwer, P, Lambert, 
D., Welch, J. 2006. When Do We Eat? An Evaluation of 
Food Items Input into an Electronic Food Monitoring 
Application. In Proc Pervasive Health ‘06.  

13. Tsai, C., Lee, G., Raab, F., Norman, G., Sohn, T., 
Griswold, W., Patrick, K. 2007. Usability and 
Feasibility of PmEB: A Mobile Phone Application for 
Monitoring Real Time Caloric Balance. Mobile 
Networks and Applications.  12(2-3), pp 173-184. 
14. Tollmar, K., Bentley, F., Viedma, C. 2012. Mobile 

Health Mashups: Making sense of multiple streams of 
wellbeing and contextual data for presentation on a 
mobile device. In Proc Pervasive Health 2012.

Session: Technologies for Life 2CHI 2013: Changing Perspectives, Paris, France1098 
 
