The ‘Self’ as Barrier for Self-Management Technologies in 
Healthcare? 

Bert	Vandenberghe 
Meaningful	Interactions	Lab,	
KU	Leuven	-	imec 
Leuven 
Belgium 
bert.vandenberghe@kuleuven.be 

Jasper	Vanhoof 
Academic	Centre	for	Nursing	and	
Midwifery,	KU	Leuven 
Leuven 
Belgium 
jasper.vanhoof@kuleuven.be 

Roos	Voorend 
Meaningful	Interactions	Lab,	
KU	Leuven	-	imec 
Leuven 
Belgium 
roos.voorend@kuleuven.be 

David	Geerts 
Meaningful	Interactions	Lab,	
KU	Leuven	-	imec 
Leuven 
Belgium 
david.geerts@kuleuven.be 

Fabienne	Dobbels 
Academic	Centre	for	Nursing	and	
Midwifery,	KU	Leuven 
Leuven 
Belgium 
fabienne.dobbels@kuleuven.be 

ABSTRACT	
Self-management	technologies	are	promising	in	healthcare.	In	
the	 name	 of	 patient	 empowerment,	 they	 can	 address	 an	
important	 challenge:	 how	 to	 meet	 an	 increasing	 demand	 for	
care	without	additional	resources.	We	designed	and	evaluated	
the	 PICASSO-Tx	 system:	 a	 technology	 solution	 to	 support	
transplant	 patients	 and	 their	 self-management	 of	 diet,	
physical	activity	and	medication	adherences.	In	a	Sield	study,	
19	 patients	 used	 the	 system	 for	 two	 weeks	 at	 home.	 We	
discovered	 that	 although	 we	 intended	 patients	 to	 become	
actors	 in	 the	 management	 of	 their	 own	 health,	 they	 saw	
themselves	 rather	 as	 a	 subject,	 leaving	 the	 active	 role	 for	
caregivers.	 In	 this	 paper,	 we	 describe	 how	 patients	expected	
their	 data	 to	 be	 shared	 with	 others,	 how	 they	 perceived	 the	
system	 as	 a	 tool	 for	 monitoring	 by	 caregivers,	 and	 what	
expectations	towards	these	caregivers	this	perception	brings.	
Furthermore,	we	discuss	the	barriers	we	encountered	caused	
by	 the	 ‘self’	 and	 conclude	 with	 design	 recommendations	 for	

Permission	to	make	digital	or	hard	copies	of	all	or	part	of	this	work	for	personal	
or	classroom	use	is	 granted	 without	fee	provided	that	copies	are	 not	made	 or	
distributed	for	profit	or	commercial	advantage	and	that	copies	bear	this	notice	
and	the	full	citation	 on	the	first	page.	 Copyrights	for	components	 of	this	 work	
owned	by	others	than	the	author(s)	must	be	honored.	Abstracting	with	credit	is	
permitted.	To	copy	otherwise,	or	republish,	to	post	on	servers	or	to	redistribute	
to	 lists,	 requires	 prior	 specific	 permission	 and/or	 a	 fee.	 Request	 permissions	
from	Permissions@acm.org.	

PervasiveHealth	'18,	May	21–24,	2018,	New	York,	NY,	USA	
©	2018	Copyright	is	held	by	the	owner/author(s).	Publication	rights	licensed	to	
ACM.	
ACM	978-1-4503-6450-8/18/05…$15.00		
https://doi.org/10.1145/3240925.3240974	

self-management	 technologies	 in	 healthcare	 related	 to	 these	
expectations,	perceptions,	and	barriers.	

CCS	CONCEPTS	
•	 Human-centered	 computing	 →	 User	 studies	 •	 Applied	
computing	→	Health	informatics	

KEYWORDS	
Chronic	 health	 conditions;	 healthcare;	 patients,	 personal	
informatics;	quantiSied	self;	self-management;	user	experience	

1	

lifestyle	 is	 required,	 especially	 after	

INTRODUCTION	
Evolutions	in	healthcare	make	people	live	longer,	yet,	with	
increasing	age,	 the	 prevalence	 of	 chronic	 diseases	 is	 steadily	
rising.	 In	 order	 to	 prevent	 or	 manage	 chronic	 diseases,	 a	
life-saving	
healthy	
interventions	 such	as	 organ	transplantation.	Patients	 are	 not	
cured	after	transplantation	but	remain	in	long-term	follow-up	
within	 the	 transplant	 center	 with	 regular	 check-up	 visits	
taking	place.	Moreover,	patients	need	to	adhere	to	a	complex	
therapeutic	 regimen.	 For	 example,	 patients	 have	 to	 take	
immunosuppressive	drugs	at	fixed	time	points.	Omitting	doses	
or	 irregular	 time	 of	 intake	 might	 endanger	 the	 patient,	 as	
transplant	 rejection	 and	 eventually	 loss	 of	 the	 transplanted	
organ	might	occur.	 Not	 only	 poor	medication	adherence,	but	
also	 the	 lack	 of	 sufficient	 physical	activity	 and	a	 healthy	diet	
have	a	substantial	influence	on	the	long-term	survival	rate.	

Inspired	by	the	quantified	self	movement,	technology	can	
be	 deployed	 to	 provide	 people	 with	 data	 about	 their	 own	
behavior.	Providing	personalized	feedback	on	their	monitored	

 
 
 
	
	
	
PervasiveHealth 2018 – IMPAcT Workshop 

B. Vandenberghe et al. 

data	 can	 make	 people	 more	 aware	 of	 their	 behavior	 and	
enable	 them	 to	 improve	 or	 maintain	 a	 healthy	 lifestyle.	 Self-
management	 is	 an	 attractive	 approach	 for	 hospitals	 to	
empower	patients	[35,	36]	and	it	could	help	save	resources	as	
patients	 are	 less	 dependent	 on	 the	 availability	 of	 caregivers	
[37].	

Self-management	 in	 healthcare	 puts	 responsibility	 of	
adherence	with	patients.	Hence,	it	is	of	utmost	importance	to	
design	self-management	technology	that	is	being	accepted	by	
the	 patients 1 .	 Therefore,	 we	
investigated	 how	 self-
management	technology	is	adopted	and	perceived	by	patients.	
We	aimed	to	answer	this	research	question	by	designing	and	
evaluating	 a	 platform	 to	 support	 solid	 organ	 transplant	
patients	 (heart,	 lung,	 liver,	 and	 kidney)	 with	 the	 self-
management	 of	 their	 diet,	 physical	 activity	 and	 medication	
adherences.	

We	 followed	 a	 human-centered	 design	 approach	 in	 the	
design	 and	 development	 of	 the	 user	 interface.	 First,	 we	
learned	 about	 the	 daily	 habits	 of	 the	 user	 regarding	 diet,	
physical	 activity	 and	 medication	 adherences	 through	 diary	
studies	 and	 	 contextual	 interviews.	 Next,	 the	 user	 interface	
was	 designed	 through	 iterative	 prototyping.	 Finally,	 a	 field	
usability	study	wrapped	up	the	design	phase.	

We	intended	the	patient	to	be	an	actor	in	the	management	
of	their	own	health	and	explained	the	aims	of	the	technology	
to	 all	 of	 our	 patients.	 However,	 in	 the	 concluding	 interviews	
we	 discovered	 that	 patients	interpreted	 the	 system	 as	a	 tool	
for	monitoring	by	caregivers	and	perceived	themselves	rather	
as	a	subject,	leaving	the	active	role	for	caregivers.	In	contrast	
with	 our	 expectations	 this	 was	 not	 perceived	 as	 something	
negative	by	the	patients.	

We	 argue	 that	 this	 mismatch	 between	 design	 intentions	
and	patients’	perceptions	can	lead	to	the	abandonment	of	the	
technology	or	even	non-use,	which	is	by	no	means	the	fault	of	
the	patient.	The	contributions	of	this	paper	are	insights	in	how	
patients	 perceived	 self-management	 technology	 and	 their	
expectations	 towards	 these	 technologies.	 Moreover,	 we	
describe	 the	 context-specific	 barriers	 for	 self-management	
give	 design	
technology	 we	
recommendations	
in	
healthcare	based	on	our	findings.		

encountered	
for	

self-management	

technology	

and	 we	

2	 RELATED	WORK	

In	 this	 section,	 we	 discuss	 quantified	 self,	 the	availability	
of	 health	 information,	 and	 the	 paradigm	 shift	 in	 healthcare	
towards	 patient	 empowerment.	 We	 describe	 how	 this	
inspired	 self-management	 technologies	 in	 HCI	 research	 and	

1	For	 clarity,	 we	 consistently	 use	 the	 word	 ‘patient’	 throughout	 this	 paper	 for	
technology	users	and	participants	in	this	study	as	well.	

2 

conclude	 with	 related	 work	 about	 technology	 appropriation	
and	non-use	of	technology.	

2.1	 Quantified	Self,	Health	Information,	and	

Patient	Empowerment	

Quantified	self	(QS)	refers	to	collecting	information	about	
people’s	 body	 vitals	 and	 daily	 habits	 on	a	regular	basis	 [27].	
The	 information	 can	 be	 biological,	 physiological,	 behavioral,	
or	environmental	and	is	collected	in	a	proactive	way	[39].	One	
example	 of	 self-quantification	 devices	 is	 the	 weight	 scale.	
Since	 the	 late	 19th	 century	 it	 has	 enabled	 people	 to	 reflect	
upon	their	weight	[39].		

More	 recently	 the	 number	 of	 tools	 and	 devices	 used	 for	
self-quantification	that	people	wear	(wearables)	or	carry	with	
them	(including	smartphone	applications)	has	grown	rapidly.	
Wearables	 are	 worn	 on	 the	 body	 and	 they	 automatically	
collect	 data	 such	 as	 physical	 activity,	 pulse,	 heart	 rate,	 body	
temperature,	calories	burned,	and	sleep	patterns	[30].	Fitbit	is	
known	 for	 creating	 wearable	 technologies.	 In	 2008	 they	
launched	 a	 clip-on	 device	 used	 to	 measure	 steps,	 calories,	
activity	 intensity,	 and	 sleep;	 Later	 in	 2013	 they	 launched	 a	
wristband	 version	 and	 other	 companies	 such	 as	 Nike	 and	
Jawbone	 created	 similar	 technologies	 [9].	 Also	 clothes	 are	
equipped	 with	 sensors	 to	 measure	 body	 vitals	 [8].	 The	
adoption	of	the	smartphone	has	facilitated	people	to	quantify	
themselves	using	smartphone	applications	(apps).	These	apps	
enable	 people	 to	 automatically	 or	 manually	 monitor	 sport	
exercises	 and	 performances,	 daily	 steps,	 sleep	 patterns,	 and	
food	intake	[30].		

Self-quantification	 enables	 people	 to	 collect	 information	
about	 themselves	 and	 act	 upon	 this	
information.	 This	
facilitates	 self-knowledge,	 awareness,	 self-control,	 self-
improvement,	 and	 self-reflection.	 People	 use	 their	 data	 to	
improve	
improve	
performance.	 They	 can	 share	 their	 data	 easily	 with	 peers,	
sports	coaches,	and	medical	staff.		

concentration,	 and	

increase	

sleep,	

Here,	people's	experience	of	their	self	is	(partially)	shaped	
by	the	use	of	technology	applications	that	measure	body	vitals	
and	 daily	 habits.	 In	 the	 design	 process,	 social,	 political,	
economic,	 and	 technical	 influences,	 shape	 the	 features	 and	
functions	 of	 technology	 applications	 [5].	 They	 assume	
functions	 and	 desires	 of	 users,	 and	 force	 meaning	 and	
subjectivity	 on	 the	 users	 by	
interpreting	 data	 about	
descriptions	 of	 the	 body	 [25].	 Also,	 health	 promoters	 may	
contribute	 to	 negative	 feelings	 of	 shame	 and	guilt	 by	forcing	
an	 ideal	 of	 a	 healthy	 lifestyle	 on	 users	 through	 technology	
applications	[26].	

While	quantified	self	is	about	people	gathering	their	own	
information,	health	information	in	general	is	becoming	more	
accessible	 to	 patients	 as	 well	 through	 the	 growing	 use	 of	
information	
in	
healthcare.	 Information	 that	 used	 to	 be	 available	 only	 via	

technologies	 and	 online	

technologies	

  
	
 
                                                
The ‘Self’ as Barrier for Self-Management Technologies in 
Healthcare? 

medical	 specialists,	 is	 now	 widely	 available	 online.	 [26].	
Health	information	is	one	of	the	topics	that	is	most	frequently	
searched	for	online.	It	can	improve	a	patients’	understanding	
of	their	medical	condition	[29].		

The	 disclosure	 of	 health	 information	 has	 facilitated	 a	
paradigm	 shift	 in	 healthcare.	 Traditionally	 a	 paternalistic	
model	was	common	in	which	the	patient	passively	accepts	the	
doctor’s	 authority	 and	 choice	 of	 treatment.	 New	 forms	 of	
healthcare	 delivery	models	 are	 developed	 that	are	 grounded	
in	 collaboration	 and	 in	 which	 a	 partnership	 between	 the	
doctor	 and	 the	 patient	 is	 established	 [6,	 10,	 29].	 The	 old	
thinking	 in	 which	 patients	 placed	 the	 responsibility	 of	 their	
health	with	the	doctor	is	changing	to	a	new	thinking	in	which	
patients	 take	 responsibility	 to	 manage	 their	 own	 health	 and	
they	have	the	tools	to	do	so	[38].	

2.2	 Self-Management	Technologies	in	HCI	

Self-management	 technology	 is	 widely	 discussed,	 both	 in	
medical	 as	 well	 as	 in	 HCI	 literature.	 Several	 barriers	 for	 the	
sustainable	use	of	self-management	technologies	have	already	
been	identified:	

The	work	of	Bhachu	et	al.	[3]	showed	that	elderly	people	
are	 willing	 to	 accept	 technology	 for	 self-managing	 chronic	
health	conditions,	if	it	benefits	their	health	condition.		

Simm	 et	 al.	 [35]	 presented	 Snap,	 a	 wearable	 to	 self-
manage	anxiety	for	people	with	autism.	The	authors	suggest	a	
DIY	 co-development	 approach	 to	 design	 technology	 for	 self-
management	 of	 anxiety,	 as	 it	 removes	 the	 focus	 from	 the	
diagnosis	and	emphasizes	a	holistic	approach	to	the	user.	

Other	 examples	 include	 the	 work	 on	 diabetes	 self-	
management	by	Maniam	et	al.	[28]	that	identifies	financial	and	
privacy	 aspects	 for	 technology	 acceptance	 and	 the	 work	 of	
Doyle	 et	 al.	 [13]	 on	 smart	 home	 data	 for	 ambient-assisted	
living	that	emphasized	the	importance	of	education	and	goal-
setting.		

Harrison	et	al.	[19]	described	how	accuracy	and	aesthetics	
are	 important	 barriers	 for	 quantified	 selfers	 using	 activity	
trackers.	Li	et	al.	[23,24]	studied	lead	users—early	adopters	of	
technology,	 who	 might	 not	 be	 representative	 for	 a	 whole	
population—and	
design	
recommendations	 for	 personal	 informatics.	 They	 present	 an	
iterative	 stage-based	 model	 (including	 reflection	 and	 action)	
and	 found	 that	 barriers	 such	 as	 accuracy,	 time	 constraints,	
and	difficulties	understanding	visualizations,	cascade	through	
stages.		

identified	

barriers	

and	

Despite	 this	 knowledge	 on	 barriers,	 sustainable	 use	 of	
quantified	 self	 tools	 in	 the	 long-term	 remains	 difficult,	 even	
for	lead	users	[2].	Furthermore,	when	introducing	quantified	
self	approaches	to	atypical	audiences	(other	than	middle-aged	
white	 men)	 new	 challenges	 emerge	 as	 these	 atypical	 end-
in	 their	 natural	
users	 often	

lack	 required	 resources	

PervasiveHealth 2018 – IMPAcT Workshop 

environment	 [22].	 Also,	 there	 might	 be	 a	 misalignment	
between	 designer	 intentions	 and	 end-user	 views	 when	
thinking	about	a	quantified	life	[18].	

Next	 to	 the	 known	 barriers,	 we	 argue	 that	 in	 binding	
applications	 of	 quantified	 self	 such	 as	 self-management	
applications	in	healthcare,	the	inherent	curiosity	of	quantified	
selfers	 might	 be	
lacking	 as	 compared	 to	 non-binding	
applications	of	quantified	self	such	as	sports	activity	trackers	
or	mindfulness	training.	Non-binding	applications	start	with	a	
deliberate	 choice	 and	 freedom	 as	 they	 are	 aimed	 at	 healthy	
individuals	that	want	to	initiate	or	keep	up	a	certain	lifestyle.	
Whereas	 most	 of	 this	 related	 work	 involves	 the	 caregivers’	
perspective,	 or	 used	 focus	 groups	 as	 method,	 we	 focus	 on	
patients’	 experiences	 after	 they	 use	 the	 self-	 management	
technology	 for	 two	 weeks	 in	 their	 own	 home.	 We	 are	
interested	in	how	patients	perceive	the	technology	after	using	
it,	and	the	barriers	they	encounter.		

2.3	 Technology	appropriation	and	Non-use	

Ever	 since	 products	 are	 designed	 they	 are	 used	 in	 ways	
they	are	intended	to	and	in	new	ways	[4].	Appropriation	is	a	
creative	use	of	a	product	where	the	user	adopts	a	new	use	of	
the	 product	 [33].	 Appropriation	 is	 found	 in	 a	 variety	 of	
products	 such	 as	 digital	 camera’s	 [33],	 online	 learning	
platforms	[11],	and	mobile	banking	[31].			

Users’	 values	 affect	 their	 experiences	 with	 products	 or	
services	 [21].	 Every	 product,	 whether	 intentionally	 designed	
or	 not	 can	 trigger	 associations	 that	 depend	 on	 social	 and	
cultural	 norms	 [4]	 and	 through	 use,	 users	 construct	 new	
meanings	on	the	technologies	they	use	[11].	

Designers	 have	 specific	

intentions	 when	 designing	
products,	 these	 intentions	 are	 embedded	 in	 the	 product	 as	
features	and	affordances	[11].	When	a	product	is	designed,	the	
features	 and	 functions	 are	 shaped	 by	 social,	 political,	
economic,	and	technical	influences	[5].	Also,	technologies	are	
designed	around	assumptions	about	what	needs	to	be	done	to	
establish	 an	 action,	 but	 often	 they	 are	 wrong	 [17].	
Appropriation	is	critical	to	the	adoption	and	thus	success	of	a	
technology.	 Therefore	
to	 understand	
it	
appropriation	for	those	who	develop	technology	[12].		

crucial	

is	

New	 appropriations	 of	 design	 do	 not	 necessarily	 need	 to	
be	a	problem.	It	can	be	seen	as	a	phenomenon	that	provides	
opportunities	 to	 learn	 about	 the	 user	 as	 appropriations	
capture	 the	 needs	 of	 the	 users.	 Carroll	 [5]	 argues	 that	
appropriation	 is	 part	 of	 the	 design	 and	 that	 the	 uses’	
appropriation	of	technology	may	be	viewed	as	a	completion	of	
the	
technology	 perspective	
appropriation	 can	 provide	 user	 requirements	 for	 future	
products	or	versions	[12].	However,	in	certain	domains	such	
as	 banking	 where	 a	 system	 may	 be	 used	 for	 fraud	 or	 in	
healthcare	where	a	doctor	may	need	to	use	a	tool	the	way	that	

innovation	 cycle.	 From	 a	

3 

	
 
PervasiveHealth 2018 – IMPAcT Workshop 

B. Vandenberghe et al. 

it	 is	 intended	 to,	 appropriation	 is	 not	 desirable	 as	 the	
anticipated	outcome	is	something	that	is	relied	upon.	

An	 important	 field	 of	 study	 in	 this	 light	 is	 non-use.	 If	
technologies	 do	 not	 get	 appropriated	 or	adopted	 in	 the	 long	
term,	why	are	they	abandoned,	or	not	even	considered	for	use	
in	 the	first	 place?	 As	 Satchell	 and	 Dourish	 [34]	 argue,	 use	 is	
only	 one	 kind	 of	 relating	 with	 technology	and	 non-users	 are	
not	 bad	 users.	 The	 study	 of	 non-use	 can	 equally	 bring	 up	
insights	regarding	the	design	of	technology	[34].	Fuchsberger	
et	al.	[16]	consider	non-use	as	an	activity.	They	too	call	for	a	
different	way	of	seeing	non-users,	as	if	these	users	are	in	need	
for	something	[16].	As	Baumer	et	al.	[1]	describe,	use	and	non-
use	could	even	be	considered	as	a	non-binary	spectrum.		

Havlucu	et	al.	[20]	studied	the	abandonment	of	wearables	
with	 tennis	 players;	 They	 found	 that	 generic	 feedback	 that	
lacks	qualitative	interpretation	of	the	data	and	the	absence	of	
coaches	on	the	platform	leads	to	this	abandonment.		

Epstein	 et	 al.	 [14]	 studied	 abandonment	 of	 personal	
informatics	 too;	 They	
identified	 the	 cost	 of	 tracking,	
discomfort	with	the	information,	and	concerns	regarding	data	
quality	 as	 reasons	 for	 abandonment.	 Furthermore,	 they	
studied	 what	 happens	 after	 abandonment:	 Their	 findings	
point	at	feelings	 of	 guilt	 and	 frustration,	 but	also	 at	freedom	
after	 abandoning	 personal	 informatics	 tools.	 To	 conclude,	 as	
Clawson	et	al.	[7]	illustrate	with	their	work	on	abandonment	
of	 personal	 health-tracking	 technologies,	 abandonment	 and	
non-use	 are	 complex	 stories.	 Abandonment	 can	 also	 be	 a	
consequence	 of	 people	 having	 upgraded	 devices	 or	 achieved	
their	goals.		

3	 CASE	STUDY	

The	 PICASSO-Tx	 project	

tests	 a	 self-management	
intervention	 with	 or	 without	 interactive	 health	 technology	

option	depending	on	the	patient’s	preference.	It	aims	to	study	
whether	patients’	preference	for	technology	to	support	them	
and	 manage	 their	 condition	 impacts	 health	 outcomes.	 Self-
management	 through	 technology	 is	 a	 promising	 way	 to	
provide	 support	 to	 patients	 next	 to	 the	 regular	 visits	 to	 the	
hospital.	 The	 system	 was	 built	 using	 off-the	 shelf	 hardware	
and	a	custom	designed	software	component.	The	PICASSO-Tx		
platform	 will	 be	 deployed	 in	 a	 clinical	 trial	 to	 answer	 the	
question	about	preference.	

3.1	 System	Overview	

The	 goal	 of	 the	 PICASSO-Tx	 project	 was	 to	 develop	 an	
open	system,	that	is	free	of	any	judgment.	Patients	can	use	this	
system	 to	 measure	 their	 own	 behavior	 and	 gain	 insights	 in	
their	behavior	and	themselves.	The	system	is	not	intended	to	
be	 used	 by	 doctors	 in	 the	 light	 of	 self-management	 and	
considering	the	increasing	amount	of	workload	of	doctors.		

The	 PICASSO-Tx	 project	 combines	 three	 smart	 devices	
tracking	 the	 patient’s	 behavior:	 a	 Fitbit	 One	 stepcounter2,	 a	
Fitbit	Aria	smart	scale3,	and	a	smart	pill	box4.	The	data	that	is	
collected	 with	 these	 devices	 is	 presented	 on	 a	 dedicated	
website	where	patients	get	feedback	about	their	adherence	to	
medication	(see	Figure	1	for	an	example	about	medication).	

As	 there	 was	 a	 clear	 need	 for	 education	 to	 overcome	
existing	 health	 beliefs,	 the	 website’s	 landing	 page	 offers	
patients	 challenging	 true	 or	 false	 questions	 about	 diet,	
physical	activity,	and	medication	routines.	

 The	website	offers	patients	insight	in	their	step	count	on	a	
bar	 graph	 in	 a	 seven-day	 timeframe.	 This	 timeframe	 allows	
bad	 days	 to	 be	 compensated,	 but	 does	 not	 highlight	 when	 a	
patient’s	condition	gets	worse	(e.g.	due	to	a	relapse).	

Below	 the	 seven-day	 graph,	 the	 cumulated	 distance	 of	
their	 steps	 is	 presented	 on	 a	 map.	 The	 platform	 allows	
patients	 to	 set	 a	 goal	 for	 them	 to	 reach,	 e.g.	 Santiago	 De	
Compostela	[40].	Then	on	a	traditional	weight	graph,	patients	
can	 track	 their	 weight.	 The	 graph	 highlights	 zones	 based	 on	
BMI	 by	 default,	 but	 can	 be	 customized	 by	 the	 doctor	 if	
required.	

For	medication	adherence,	the	platform	can	be	customized	
per	patient.	Most	patients	need	to	take	their	medication	every	
twelve	hours,	within	a	window	of	one	hour.	We	plot	the	times	
they	 took	 their	 medication	 and	 added	 a	 color	 gradient	 to	
indicate	 the	 deviation	 from	 the	 prescribed	 moment	 (see	
Figure	1).	The	more	accurate,	the	greener	the	dot	gets.	Once	
the	medication	was	taken	too	early	or	too	late,	the	dots	turn	
red.	 The	 gradient	 emphasizes	 the	 fact	 that	 it	 there	 is	 some	
margin,	but	the	more	accurate,	the	better.	

Figure	1:	PICASSO-Tx	website,	giving	feedback	on	
medication	intake	

2	http://www.Sitbit.com/one	
3	http://help.fitbit.com/?p=aria	
4	http://www.aardexgroup.com/products/mems-cap	

4 

  
	
 
                                                
The ‘Self’ as Barrier for Self-Management Technologies in 
Healthcare? 

Finally,	 the	 website	 also	 gives	 recommendations	 on	
healthy	diet.	This	consisted	of	general	diet	recommendations	
based	 on	 the	 Belgian	 diet	 guidelines.	 This	 information	 was	
also	 shared	after	 transplantation	 by	 a	 dietarian	and	 patients	
received	a	hard	copy	of	this	information	once.		

We	 designed	

3.2	 Human-Centered	Design	Process	
the	 PICASSO-Tx	 platform	

in	 close	
collaboration	 with	 the	 academic	 center	 for	 nursing.	 We	
started	 the	 project	 collecting	 insights	 about	 the	 current	
practices	 of	 patients	 using	 diary	 studies	 and	 contextual	
interviews.	Based	on	the	behavior	model	of	BJ	Fogg	[15],	we	
asked	 19	 patients	 to	 keep	 track	 of	 their	 self-management	
practices	 related	 to	 our	 PICASSO-Tx	 project.	 In	 a	 booklet,	
patients	 tracked	 their	 activities	 and	 experience	 during	 one	
week	 and	 on	 dedicated	 forms	 patients	 tracked	 their	 diet,	
physical	 activity,	 and	 medication	 adherence.	 We	 concluded	
the	diary	study	with	a	contextual	interview	at	patients’	homes	
to	discuss	their	current	practices.		

The	 results	 showed	 that	 the	 main	 reason	 for	 non-
adherence	 to	 medication	 was	 the	 interruption	 of	 daily	
routines.	 For	 example	 when	 the	 weather	 is	 good	 patients	
leave	 their	 house	 to	 go	 out	 but	 forget	 to	 bring	 their	
medication.	Another	insight	was	that	people	hold	false	beliefs	
about	diet.		

Based	 on	 the	 insights	 collected	 with	 the	 diary	 study	 and	
the	contextual	interviews,	we	started	an	iterative	prototyping	
phase	and	made	our	first	sketches	of	the	PICASSO-Tx	website.	
We	invited	patients	to	our	lab,	to	test	different	approaches	to	
give	 feedback	 on	 steps,	 weight,	 medication	 adherence,	 and	
healthy	 diet.	We	repeated	 this	 process	 using	 digital	 sketches	
and	an	interactive	mockup.	In	total,	we	included	12	patients	in	
3	 rounds.	 All	 evaluations	 were	 conducted	 in	 our	 lab	 at	 the	
university	campus.	

After	 the	 developers	 implemented	 our	 findings,	 we	
conducted	 a	 field	 evaluation	 of	 the	 PICASSO-Tx	 platform.	
Initially,	 20	 patients	 were	 recruited	 to	 use	 the	 PICASSO-Tx	
platform	 at	 home.	 One	 patient	 was	 excluded,	 as	 he	 did	 not	
have	a	working	internet	connection.	Finally,	19	patients	were	
included	in	the	study.		The	findings	presented	in	this	paper	are	
based	on	this	final	phase	of	the	project.	

All	 studies	 within	 the	 project	 were	 approved	 by	 the	
medical	ethical	board	of	the	university	hospital	in	Leuven.	As	
most	 patients	 were	 willing	 to	 participate	 the	 project,	 we	
included	 new	 patients	 for	 every	 study	 or	 round.	 In	 every	
round,	 we	 balanced	 patients	 from	 the	 different	 solid	 organ	
transplant	departments	(heart,	lung,	liver,	and	kidney),	as	well	
as	 condition	
time	 since	
related	 variables	 such	 as	
transplantation	and	demographic	variables	were	balanced.	

PervasiveHealth 2018 – IMPAcT Workshop 

4	 METHOD	

4.1	 Sample	

We	 conducted	 a	 field	 evaluation	 with	 19	 patients	 (11	
males,	8	females;	aged	21–69	with	an	average	age	of	52).	The	
patients	 in	 this	 study	 were	 recruited	by	 the	 academic	center	
for	nursing.	We	included	five	patients	of	the	heart,	kidney,	and	
lung	 transplant	 departments,	 and	 four	 patients	 of	 the	 liver	
transplant	 department.	 We	 balanced	 patients	 who	 claimed	
they	 do	 or	 do	 not	 self-manage	 one	 or	 multiple	 of	 our	 target	
behaviors	(diet,	physical	activity,	and	medication	adherence).	
Next	to	that,	we	aimed	to	balance	time	since	transplantation,	
sex,	age,	marital	status,	education,	and	employment.	We	used	
several	inclusion	criteria:	patients	needed	to	be	fit	enough	to	
participate,	live	in	or	close	to	Leuven	(Belgium),	and	be	able	to	
understand	and	sign	the	informed	consent	forms.		

4.2	 Procedure	

We	first	visited	patients	at	home	to	install	the	equipment	
and	explain	the	platform	to	the	patients.	During	this	first	visit,	
we	 also	 conducted	 a	 usability	 evaluation	 of	 the	 final	 system.	
This	allowed	us	to	tweak	the	platform	before	deploying	it	on	
large	scale	in	a	clinical	trial.	This	visit	took	one	to	two	hours	
per	patient.	

Patients	 used	 the	 PICASSO-Tx	 platform	 for	 two	 weeks	 at	
home.	 The	 platform	 supported	 their	 self-management	 of	
physical	activity,	healthy	eating,	and	medication	adherence.		

After	 10	 days	 they	 were	 contacted	 to	 arrange	 a	 second	
home	 visit.	 During	 that	 visit,	 the	equipment	 was	 uninstalled,	
and	we	conducted	a	closing	interview.	The	interview	focused	
on	 the	 patients’	 user	 experience	 after	 using	 the	 platform	for	
two	weeks.	

4.3	 Analysis	

The	 interview	 data	 were	 analyzed	 using	 content	 analysis	
while	 specifically	 focusing	 on	 the	 barriers	 and	 enablers	 that	
the	patients	encountered	while	using	the	PICASSO-Tx	system.	
During	 the	 analysis,	 we	 noticed	 that	 patients	 formed	 mental	
models	 of	 the	 platform	 that	 differed	 substantially	 from	 how	
we	designed	the	platform.	This	resulted	in	a	new	approach	for	
the	 analysis	 to	 answer	 the	 question:	 What	 are	 expectations	
patients	have	about	the	platform	and	how	do	they	perceive	the	
system?	We	revisited	the	recordings	of	the	closing	interviews	
and	 coded	 the	 interviews	 from	 that	 perspective.	 The	 results	
below	 discuss	 the	 outcomes	 of	 this	 selective	 coding	 of	 the	
closing	interviews.	

5 

	
 
	
	
	
	
PervasiveHealth 2018 – IMPAcT Workshop 

B. Vandenberghe et al. 

5	 RESULTS	

During	 the	 analysis	 of	 the	 closing	 interviews	 we	 focused	
on	 patients’	 expectations	 towards	 the	 system	 and	
its	
implementation,	 perceptions	 of	 the	 platform,	 and	 potential	
barriers	 related	 to	 these	 expectations	 and	 perceptions	 after	
using	the	PICASSO-Tx	system	for	two	weeks	at	home.		

5.1	 Patients’	Expectations	

5.1.1	 Expectations towards  the system.	 Patients	 expected	
their	 data	 to	 be	 shared	 with	 others	 such	 as	 caregivers,	
although	we	were	explicit	about	the	fact	that	only	the	patient	
could	 see	 their	 data.	 They	 perceived	 the	 PICASSO-Tx	 system	
as	a	tool	for	monitoring	by	the	caregiver	and	talked	about	how	
it	 would	 be	 used	 by	 physicians	 or	 nurses	 for	 follow-up.	
Although	we	expected	strong	and	negative	opinions	about	the	
idea	 of	 monitoring	 by	 the	 caregiver	 through	 the	 technology,	
patients	perceived	this	to	be	rather	positive:	“Now	the	doctor	
can	 see	 the	 evolution	 of	 a	 patient	 [...]	 What	 an	 improvement!	
Now	 they	 can	 rely	 on	 technology	 to	 follow-up	 on	 patients.”—
P13	

Our	 patients	 saw	 little	 problems	regarding	 privacy	 about	
sharing	 this	 behavioral	 data.	 The	 caregivers	 in	 the	 hospital	
already	ask	how	things	are	going,	and	they	are	expected	to	be	
honest	 about	 their	 adherence,	 so	 why	 would	 anyone	 bother	
about	this?	“It’s	a	fundamental	principle	to	help	the	patient.	If	it	
can’t	 happen	 openly,	 then	 the	 patient	 should	 not	 engage	 in	
it.”—P19	

However,	 we	 did	 notice	 that	 our	 patients	 were	 hesitant	
about	 sharing	 the	 aspects	 they	 had	 most	 difficulties	 with:	
“Maybe	 the	 number	 of	 steps	 shouldn’t	 be	 shared,	 otherwise	
the	doctors	become	too	much	like	the	police.	Of	course,	weight	
and	medication	would	be	fine,	as	you	have	to	do	these	things	
anyway.”—P5	

This	patient	did	not	have	problems	with	taking	medication	
and	 used	 the	 scales	 every	 day,	 but	 found	 it	 hard	 to	 be	
physically	 active.	 With	 other	 patients,	 we	 encountered	
objections	 against	 different	 aspects	 of	 the	 platform	 being	
shared	 with	 caregivers,	 mostly	 depending	 on	 how	 well	 (or	
bad)	they	did.		

5.1.2	 Expectations  towards  caregivers.	 Since	 our	 patients	
understood	 the	 platform	 as	 a	 way	 to	 organize	 monitoring,	
they	 had	 certain	 expectations	 towards	 caregivers	 related	 to	
this	 as	 well.	 Our	 patients	 expressed	 how	 they	 totally	
understood	why	physicians	would	want	or	even	need	to	have	
access	 to	 the	 data.	 In	 the	 interviews,	 they	 described	 how	
physicians	 would	 benefit	 from	 their	 data	 being	 included	 in	
their	 patient	 file:	 “It	 would	 be	 nice	 if	 they,	 from	 the	 hospital,	
would	 be	 able	 to	 track	 when	 things	 go	 wrong.	 For	 example	
when	you've	had	enough	and	no	longer	take	the	medication.”—
P8	

6 

Patients	 also	 saw	 how	 the	 platform	 would	 make	 the	
contact	 between	 caregivers	 and	 patients	 more	 time-efficient	
while	using	it	for	monitoring	them	and	follow-up:	“If	I	become	
ill,	I	call	the	hospital.	These	are	long	and	technical	conversations	
because	 I	 have	 to	 go	 through	 everything	 I	 did	 in	 the	 previous	
days.	Now	they	could	look	at	this	system.	It's	interesting	because	
all	information	is	at	one	place.”—P19	

Next	 to	 monitoring	 and	 follow-up,	 patients	 expected	 an	
active	role	for	caregivers	in	the	implementation	of	the	system.	
The	patients	expressed	their	appreciation	for	physicians,	how	
the	 caregivers	 would	 coach	 patients	 and	 how	 the	 system	
would	 support	 the	 dialogue	 between	 the	 patients	 and	 their	
physicians:	 “I	think	I've	done	bigger	blunders	than	what	is	on	
there,	no,	the	better	I	got	coached,	the	more	I'll	gain”—P19	

Some	 patients	 even	 expressed	 their	 disappointment	
because	this	interaction	with	caregivers	was	not	implemented	
in	our	prototype	yet—while	we	deliberately	never	intended	to	
implement	 this	 in	 the	 light	 of	 self-management.	 When	
evaluating	 the	 system	 as	 an	 improvement	 of	 the	 current	
situation,	they	assumed	the	interaction	with	physicians	would	
be	available	in	the	‘real’	platform.	The	patients	found	that	the	
presence	 of	 these	 caregivers	 on	 the	 platform	 would	 add	
credibility	to	it.	

Patients	appropriated	the	system	as	a	tool	for	monitoring	
by	 the	 caregivers	
in	 their	 treatment.	 When	 we	 use	
appropriation	as	a	tool	to	learn	more	about	the	users’	needs,	
this	shows	how	patients	value	a	strong	role	of	their	caregivers	
in	 their	 treatment.	 Patients	 expressed	 their	 respect	 for	 the	
professors	and	their	teams	at	the	university	hospital,	as	they	
the	reason	they	were	still	alive.	

5.2	 Patients’	Perceptions	

Patients	 perceived	 themselves	 as	 a	 subject,	 leaving	 the	
active	 role	 of	 monitoring	 by	 the	 caregiver.	 This	 was	 not	
necessarily	 a	 bad	 thing,	 as	 patients	 expressed	 how	 they	
believed	this	would	improve	their	situation.	They	mentioned	
how	 the	 platform	 helped	 them	 to	 adhere	 to	 the	 therapy	and	
the	benefit	of	a	caregiver	monitoring	their	behavior:	“You	are	
more	 careful	 when	 you're	 being	 monitored.	 I	 woke	 up	 at	 7:30	
am	to	take	my	pills.	I	thought,	I	have	to	make	sure	everything's	
fine	 while	 they	 monitor	 me.	 It	 certainly	 makes	 you	 more	
aware.”—P8	

The	perception	of	the	system	in	which	the	patient	is	being	
monitored	by	the	caregiver,	with	an	active	role	for	caregivers	
was	articulated	in	the	tendency	of	our	patients	to	justify	their	
data.	 Throughout	 the	 field	 evaluation	 study,	 patients	 made	
notes	 about	 the	 recorded	 data.	 As	 this	 functionality	 was	 not	
part	of	the	system,	to	minimize	the	burden	on	patients	in	long-
term,	several	patients	used	the	paper	booklet	we	gave	them	to	
note	feedback	on	the	system	to	annotate	the	data.	

In	 several	 situations,	 our	 patients	 wanted	 to	 clarify	 why	
they	 did	 not	 follow	 the	 dietary	 advice	 (e.g.	 because	 they	

  
	
 
	
The ‘Self’ as Barrier for Self-Management Technologies in 
Healthcare? 

celebrated	 a	 birthday	 at	 a	 restaurant),	 why	 they	 had	 fewer	
steps	(e.g.	because	they	forgot	the	stepcounter,	or	they	were	
ill),	or	how	they	actually	took	it	from	their	other	pillbox	and	
not	through	the	new	system.	“One	time,	it	said	I	did	not	take	my	
medication	while	I	did.	Another	time,	I	took	my	medication	from	
my	 other	 pillbox,	 so	 not	 from	 yours.	 I	 would	 like	 to	 add	 this	
feedback	to	the	system.	The	system	says	that	we	did	not	take	it,	
but	 I	 would	 like	 to	 indicate	 that	 I	 did	 take	 it,	 so	we	 can	 cover	
ourselves.”—P8	

Most	patients	automatically	started	justifying	their	data	to	
us	 and	 wanted	 to	do	 so	 to	 their	 caregivers	as	 well	(with	 the	
expectation	that	the	caregivers	would	also	be	able	to	see	the	
data).	When	we	asked	patients	why	they	would	want	to	justify	
their	data,	they	responded	that	the	physicians	might	draw	the	
wrong	conclusions	based	on	the	recorded	data:	“If	you	visit	the	
doctor	 after	 three	 months	 and	 he	 asks	 why	 you	 did	 not	 take	
your	 medication	 or	 why	 you	 were	 too	 late,	 he	 doesn't	 know	
what	really	happened.”—P5	

This	 tendency	 to	 justify	 the	 data	 to	 others	 emerged	
interviews,	 as	 patients	 felt	
persistently	 throughout	 the	
caregivers	would	monitor	the	patients’	behavior	through	the	
system.		

5.3	 The	‘Self’	as	Barrier	for	Self-Management	

Technologies	

In	 our	 field	 study,	 we	 observed	 several	 situations	 where	
patients	became	a	barrier	for	their	own	self-management.	Our	
for	 self-management	
analysis	 showed	 several	 barriers	
technologies	related	to	the	‘self’:	

1.  Confrontation	with	the	self		
2.  Feelings	of	shame	
3.  Lack	of	identification	

5.3.1	 Confrontation  with  the  self.	 In	 several	 situations,	 a	
gap	between	the	system	and	the	‘self’	emerged,	opposing	each	
other	 and	 raising	 barriers.	 Patients	 have	 to	 deal	 with	 their	
condition	and	its	consequences	24/7.	Patients	acknowledged	
that	 therapy	 adherence	 was	 challenging.	 Also,	 as	 patients	
often	 were	 in	 a	 very	 bad	 condition	 before	 they	 received	 a	
transplant	 organ,	 their	 current	 situation	 is	 experienced	 as	
better.	 Several	 patients	 acknowledged	 how	 time	 softens	
memories	about	their	pre-transplant	condition:	“We	feel	good	
and	 we	 feel	 healthy,	 then	 it's	 easy	 to	 forget	 where	 we	 came	
from.”—P19.	But	non-adherence	could	bring	patients	back	to	
similar	 or	 even	 worse	 conditions.	 On	 top,	 most	 patients	
experience	 severe	 side	 effects	 from	 their	 medication,	 while	
the	 benefit	 of	 not	 becoming	 ill	 is	 something	 you	 cannot	feel.	
On	 the	 contrary,	 patients	 often	 feel	 better	 when	 they	 don’t	
take	 their	 medication:	 “There	 is	 no	 immediate	 effect	 of	 the	
medication,	I	feel	nothing	if	I	don't	take	it.	At	a	certain	moment,	

PervasiveHealth 2018 – IMPAcT Workshop 

you	feel	good,	and	you	just	forget	it.”—P8.	Therefore,	patients	
doubted	 that	 putting	 more	 responsibility	 with	 the	 patients	
themselves	 would	
improve	 therapy	 adherence.	 As	 we	
discussed	 earlier,	 the	 patients	 call	 for	 an	 active	 role	 for	
caregivers.	

Quantifying	patients’	behavior	confronted	them	with	their	
condition,	which	was	often	worse	than	it	used	to	be.	Patients	
indicated	 that	 they	 experienced	 the	 system	 as	 an	 additional	
reminder	 of	 their	 condition,	 which	 was	 not	 desirable.	
Generally,	 when	 using	 QS	 applications	 people	 will	 feel	
confronted	with	their	self.	In	the	case	of	healthy	people,	they	
may	be	able	to	improve	their	situation,	however	in	the	case	of	
transplant	 patients	 their	 situation	 is	 more	 chronically	 and	
there	may	be	a	lot	harder	to	improve	the	situation.			

Most	 patients	 felt	 disappointed	 about	 their	 step	 count,	
when	 comparing	 it	 to	 others	 by	 asking	 fellow	 patients,	
caregivers,	 our	 us	 during	 the	 interview.	 Also,	 most	 patients	
were	aware	of	the	general	advise	of	taking	10.000	steps	a	day,	
which	was	far	more	than	their	personal	step	count	which	was	
typically	 2.000	 to	 4.000	 steps	 a	 day,	 with	 some	 exceptions	
taking	18.000	steps	a	day.	“I	felt	the	tendency	to	be	more	active	
while	wearing	the	step	counter,	because	I	found	the	number	of	
steps	I	took	rather	small.	Is	that	a	positive	or	negative	thing?”—
P1.	

the	

This	 seems	 positive	 at	 first,	 because	 our	 patients	 are	
motivated	
initial	
to	 do	 more	 steps.	 However,	
disappointment	might	be	reinforced	in	the	long-term,	as	it	is	
unlikely	that	the	patients’	condition	will	improve	substantially	
due	to	the	nature	of	the	condition.	Generally,	people	in	may	be	
disappointed	 initially	 when	 confronted	 with	 the	 number	 of	
steps.	 However,	 for	 healthy	 individuals	 it	 will	 be	 easier	 to	
increase	the	number	of	steps	whereas	in	the	case	of	transplant	
patients,	it	is	unlike	that	the	initial	steps	might	be	reinforced	
in	the	long	term	due	to	the	nature	of	the	condition.	

Although	we	encouraged	small	changes,	as	these	are	more	
sustainable	than	sudden	big	changes,	this	does	require	some	
patience:	 “The	 weight	 is	 far	 above	 the	 upper	 limit,	 but	 in	 a	
downward	 trend.	 It	 should	 be	 green	 instead	 of	 red,	 because	
red	 is	 demotivating	 while	 it	 is	 actually	 going	 down.	 This	
should	be	encouraged!	[...]	If	the	graph	is	not	good,	it	will	not	
be	pleasant	to	use	it.”—P6.	This	patient	had	a	BMI	over	40,	so	
his	 graph	 was	 colored	 dark	 red.	 He	 found	 the	 graph	
demotivating	 because	it	confronted	him	 time	and	time	 again	
with	 the	 fact	 that	 he	 should	 lose	 a	 lot	 of	 weight,	 which	 felt	
unreasonable	to	him.	

Other	 patients	 set	 irrational	 goals	 for	 themselves:	 “I	 had	
my	 goals,	 but	 it	 doesn't	 work	 in	 such	 a	 short	 timeframe	
[disappointed]”—P11.	 These	 disappointments	 of	 not	 meeting	
(unreasonable	 high)	 targets	 could	 lead	 to	 non-use	 of	 the	
system	in	long-term.	

7 

	
 
	
	
PervasiveHealth 2018 – IMPAcT Workshop 

B. Vandenberghe et al. 

The	system	was	designed	as	a	companion	for	the	patients	
in	 their	 daily	 endeavor	 of	 managing	 their	 health.	 In	
constructing	new	routines	by	using	the	system,	patients	felt	it	
becoming	compulsory	and	the	initial	excitement	of	starting	to	
use	a	new	system	faded.		was	replaced	by	some	reservations.	
“In	the	long	run	it	becomes	compulsory,	we	have	to	do	this	and	
then	that.	It	becomes	too	much	for	the	patient.”—P4	

5.3.2	 Feelings  of  shame.	 In	 some	 cases,	 patients	 were	
reluctant	 to	 use	 the	 technology	 due	 to	 feelings	 of	 shame.	 	 “I	
now	paid	attention,	but	I	know	that	this	won't	solve	anything	in	
the	long	term.	Maybe	it	would	help	if	my	bowel	problems	[side	
effect	of	medication]	would	be	solved.	I	already	experimented	a	
lot	with	medication,	for	example	by	not	taking	it	for	weeks.	At	a	
certain	 moment	 I	 decided	 to	 tell	 it	 anyway	 in	 the	 university	
hospital,	because	you	can't	keep	walking	around	with	it.”—P14.	
In	this	example,	the	patient	used	to	hide	information	from	his	
caregivers	by	not	telling	them	specific	details.		

Several	 patients	 indicated	 that	 they	 saw	 the	 system	 as	 a	
new	way	to	hide	or	manipulate	information	for	the	caregivers:	
“I	 hear	 so	 many	 lies	 patients	 tell	 to	 their	 doctors.	 They	 can	
manipulate	this	system,	so	it's	useless.”—P13	

Some	 patients	 felt	 ashamed	 about	 aspects	 of	 their	
condition.	We	received	a	lot	of	feedback	from	patients	on	the	
size	of	the	pillbox,	and	how	it	exposes	them	as	a	patient	to	the	
outside	 world:	 “The	 pill	 box	 is	 too	 big.	 I	 like	 to	 have	 a	 little	
privacy,	and	you	don't	flaunt	with	all	the	medication	you	need	
to	 take.”—P5.	 Several	 patients	 searched	 for	 workarounds	 to	
deal	with	the	conflict	between	the	desire	to	perform	well	on	
the	platform	and	the	desire	of	hiding	their	condition	in	social	
situations.	In	this	example,	the	patient	took	his	medication	at	
home	 before	 he	 left,	 so	 he	 did	 not	 have	 to	 take	 the	 pill	 box	
with	him.	This	patient	also	requested	the	functionality	to	add	
comments	 to	 the	 tracked	 data,	 so	 he	 could	 indicate	 it	 was	 a	
deliberate	action.	He	would	also	consider	this	intake	as	ok,	as	
to	him	he	had	no	other	choice	than	taking	it	early.	The	system	
left	him	no	choice.	

5.3.3  Lack of  identification  with  the  system.	 Patients	 often	
felt	that	the	system	did	not	apply	to	them	and	they	could	not	
identify	themselves	with	the	target	audience	of	the	system.	

including	 the	

Throughout	 the	 whole	 project,	

field	
evaluation	study,	we	encountered	patients	declaring	they	did	
quite	 well.	 Other	 patients	 had	 troubles	 adhering	 to	 the	
prescribed	 therapy,	 so	 they	 were	 happy	 to	 help	 us	 with	 the	
design	 of	 this	 system,	 so	 these	 other	 patients	 could	 be	
supported.	 After	 using	 the	 system,	 the	 numbers	 were	 not	
always	in	accordance	to	what	the	patients	told	us	during	the	
first	 home	 visit,	 but	 they	 could	 explain	 this.	 Patients	 told	 us	
they	were	not	impressed	by	the	system,	as	they	were	aware	of	
their	 behavior	 already.	 Also,	 patients	 had	 very	 specific	 or	
complex	guidelines	that	did	not	match	the	system,	so	even	if	

8 

they	 wanted	 to	 use	 the	 system,	 it	 would	 not	 work	 out.	 But,	
most	 patients	 had	 no	 difficulties	 in	 coming	 up	 with	 other	
groups	of	patients	who	would	benefit	from	using	the	system.	
In	 their	 conviction	 that	 they	 did	 well,	 our	 patients	 often	
expressed	 how	 they	did	 not	 understand	 how	 someone	could	
not	adhere	to	the	therapy,	considering	how	important	it	is—	
their	 lives	 depend	 on	 it.	 “The	 death	 rate	 seems	 to	 be	 above	
20%,	because	of	people	not	taking	their	medication	correctly	or	
alcohol	abuse.	Then	I	think,	but	that's	in	your	own	power!	[...]	I	
wonder,	 what	 is	 the	 kind	 of	 people	 who	 don't	 adhere	 to	 their	
therapy?”—P19	

When	the	tracked	data	was	not	as	perfect	as	our	patients	
predicted	 them	 to	 be,	 they	 had	 all	 kinds	 of	 explanations:	
“Having	 few	 steps	 does	 not	 mean	 you're	 not	 active.	 For	
example,	 after	 cleaning	 the	 house,	 I	 had	 less	 steps	 but	 was	
more	tired.	If	you	would	track	this,	you	would	think	I	wasn't	
active,	but	I	was	busy	the	whole	day.”—P2.	They	interpreted	
this	as	that	it	wasn’t	meant	for	them	or	stated	that	the	system	
was	inaccurate.	

Other	patients	found	conflicts	in	the	provided	information	
on	the	system	and	their	personal	prescribed	guidelines.	“The	
section	about	nutrition	does	not	appeal	to	me.	You	would	have	
to	 adapt	 it	 for	 every	 person,	 because	 one	 person	 has	 this	
guideline	and	the	others	that	guideline.	I	don't	have	to	worry	
about	sugar,	but	I	can't	eat	crudités.	[...]	Also,	this	changes	over	
time.	Earlier,	I	could	eat	crudités	though,	that	was	ok	for	both	
my	liver	and	my	kidney.”—P15	

Also,	 in	 their	 final	 verdict,	 our	 patients	 doubted	 whether	
the	 system	 was	 meant	 for	 them.	 Although	 some	 patients	
admitted	they	were	surprised	at	some	time	during	the	study,	
it	 was	 often	 attributed	 to	 inaccuracies	 of	 the	 system.	 Our	
patients	 indicated	 that	 they	 actually	 were	 aware	 of	 their	
behavior,	and	that	the	system	did	not	change	much	about	this:	
“I	 won't	 use	 the	 step	 counter,	 I	 know	 what	 I	 do.”—P5;	
“Eventually,	you	know	what	you	do.	It's	your	own	body.”—	P6	

As	 patients	 were	 talking	 how	 this	 monitoring	 by	 the	
caregiver	system	would	improve	the	situation	in	general,	we	
were	wondering	how	they	saw	it	working	for	themselves.	As	
most	patients	believed	they	did	well	on	the	aspects	that	really	
mattered,	 they	 saw	 the	 platform	 of	 little	 use	 for	 themselves.	
However,	patients	could	think	of	different	other	groups	of	our	
patients	 like	 elderly	 or	 new	 patients	 for	 whom	 it	 would	 be	
useful:	 “I	 don’t	 think	 it	 would	 be	 useful	 for	 me,	 but	 what	 if	 I	
can’t	 do	 it	 anymore	 in	 ten	 years?	 [...]	 I	 think	 it	 could	 be	 very	
useful	 for	 people	who	 can’t	 check	 upon	 their	 own	 behavior”—
P13	

This	 feedback	 returned	 throughout	 the	 project	 and	 our	
interviews	 in	 the	field	 study.	 Our	 patients	 did	 come	 up	 with	
groups	 of	 our	 patients	 who	 might	 benefit	 from	 using	 the	
system.	 The	 overall	 suggestion	 by	 patients	 was	 to	 focus	 the	
project	 on	 these	 groups.	 The	 most	 commonly	 heard	
suggestions	were	new	patients	–	also	from	patients	who	were	

  
	
 
	
	
The ‘Self’ as Barrier for Self-Management Technologies in 
Healthcare? 

only	recently	transplanted	patients	–	and	elderly	–	again,	even	
our	oldest	patients	stated	that	older	patients	would	need	this.	
“I	 would	 recommend	 it	 for	 someone	 who	 is	 starting.	 For	 me,	
who	 has	 her	 routines,	 I	 don't	 think	 we	 should	 be	 forced	 to	
change	 it.	 But	 they	 could	 follow-up	 on	 new	 patients	 using	 the	
system	right	away.”—P2	

“It	 can	 only	 serve	 people	 who	 aren't	 able	 to	 control	

themselves	anymore”—P13	

6.	 DISCUSSION	

towards	

The	 field	 evaluation	 showed	 that	 using	 self-management	
their	
technology,	 patients	 hold	 expectations	
caregivers:	 they	 expect	 their	 caregivers	 to	 look	 over	 their	
shoulder	 at	 the	 data	 and	 even	 intervene	 when	 things	 go	
wrong.	 In	 this	 way,	 the	 technology	 is	 considered	 as	 a	
companion	 to	 the	 caregiver	 rather	 than	 to	 the	 patient.	
Comparing	 this	 with	 our	
initial	 perspective	 on	 self-
management	 (the	 patient	 as	 actor	 in	 his	 or	 her	 own	 care),	
patients	 see	 themselves	 rather	 as	 subject	 and	 in	 a	 more	
passive	role.	In	patients’	perceptions,	caregivers	still	have	an	
important	 active	 role.	 There	 is	 a	 discrepancy	 between	 the	
patients’	 mental	 model	 the	 self-management	 technology	
assumes	and	the	mental	model	that	the	patient	has.		

One	can	argue	that	across	countries	the	usage	of	the	health	
care	 delivery	 model	 varies	 as	 the	 clinical	 decision-making	
process	 is	 influenced	 by	 cultural	 norms.	 The	 way	 how	
information	about	the	patient	and	the	wishes	of	the	patient	is	
collected	 and	 used	 varies	 across	 countries.	 For	 example,	 in	
Russia,	a	country	that	is	authoritarian	of	nature,	doctors	tend	
to	 take	 into	account	 patient’s	 wishes	 less	 often	 compared	 to	
other	countries	such	as	Germany	and	Sweden,	countries	that	
are	 less	 authoritarian	 of	 nature	 [32].	 Self-management	 in	
healthcare	 enables	 patients	 to	 be	 less	 dependent	 on	 their	
caregivers	and	empower	the	patient	to	take	a	more	active	role	
in	 the	 health	 care	 process.	 For	 the	 above	 reasons,	 self-
management	 in	 healthcare	 may	 be	 more	 natural	 in	 cultures	
that	 are	 less	 authoritarian	 versus	 cultures	 that	 are	 more	
authoritarian	 of	 nature.	 In	 Belgium,	 healthcare	 is	 strongly	
hierarchical,	which	could	have	influenced	our	results.	Still,	we	
argue	that	taking	into	account	patients’	expectations	towards	
caregivers	 should	 not	 be	 ignored	 when	 designing	 and	
implementing	self-management	technologies	in	any	case.	

In	 our	 study,	 patients	 often	

felt	 bad	 due	 to	 the	
confrontation	 with	 the	 fact	 that	 they	 are	 patients,	 who	 are	
chronically	ill.	Their	complex	therapy,	which	is	hard	to	adhere	
to,	is	utterly	important	as	it	is	keeping	them	alive.	Technology	
to	 support	 these	 patients	 risks	 to	isolate	 them	 even	more	 as	
patients,	while	we	heard	so	many	times	that	patients	just	want	
to	be	normal.	Also,	patients	often	assess	their	own	condition	
or	 behavior	better	 than	it	actually	 is.	A	 platform	that	targets	
patients	 who	 need	 support	 for	 diet,	 physical	 activity	 and	

PervasiveHealth 2018 – IMPAcT Workshop 

medication	 adherences	 often	 does	 not	 match	 patients’	
perceptions	of	themselves.	

We	argue	 that	the	 design	of	 self-management	 technology	
should	 be	 inclusive	 and	 flexible.	 By	 targeting	 its	 users	 as	
people,	not	patients	suffering	from	a	specific	condition,	more	
patients	 might	 identify	 themselves	 as	 target	 users.	 This	
connects	with	the	modular	DIY	co-development	approach	for	
the	 self-	 management	 of	 anxiety	 by	 Simm	 et	 al.	 [35].	 Also,	
family	 members	 could	 use	 the	 system	 as	 well.	 In	 our	 study,	
family	 members	 often	 asked	 us	 whether	 they	 could	 use	 the	
system	to	support	the	patient	or	because	they	were	interested	
in	their	own	behavior	as	well.	In	our	current	implementation	
of	 the	 PICASSO-Tx	 system,	 the	 whole	 family	 could	 use	 the	
scales,	 but	 only	 the	 weight	 of	 the	 patient	 was	 recorded.	 In	
several	 households,	multiple	 family	members	 reported	 using	
the	scales.	

We	wanted	to	avoid	that	the	system	would	resemble	as	a	
tool	for	monitoring	and	did	not	open	up	the	data	for	anyone	
else	 but	 the	 patient,	 as	 we	 feared	 that	 patients	 would	 be	
uncomfortable	with	this	idea.	However,	patients	did	perceive	
the	 system	 this	 way.	 To	 our	 surprise,	 they	 did	 not	 consider	
this	as	a	bad	thing.	On	the	contrary,	they	perceived	the	system	
as	 a	 perfect	 tool	 for	 their	 caregivers	 to	 improve	 care.	 The	
system	was	considered	a	companion	for	the	caregivers,	rather	
than	for	the	patient.	Our	patients	did	not	bother	much	about	
the	 system,	as	 long	 as	 it	 serves	caregivers	 in	 providing	 care.	
Based	 on	 these	 findings,	 we	 suggest	 to	 clearly	 indicate	 what	
data	 is	 private	for	 the	 patient,	 and	 what	 data	 is	 shared	 with	
other	parties	(even	if	all	data	is	kept	private,	as	in	our	system).	
Doing	 so,	 the	 privacy	 concerns	as	 described	by	 Maniam	 [28]	
can	 be	 addressed.	 Also,	 allowing	 patients	 to	 justify	 the	
recorded	 data	 (both	 for	 private	 and	 shared	 data)	 might	
increase	patients’	feeling	of	comfort	with	the	data	and	enable	
them	to	reflect	upon	their	data.	

6.1	 Summary:	Design	Recommendations	

1.	Specify	and	explicate	the	presence	and	role	of	caregivers	
on	 the	 platform.	 This	 information	 adds	 credibility	 to	 the	
platform	and	allows	patients	to	adjust	their	expectations	both	
towards	 the	 system	and	their	caregivers	 Because	 the	 system	
was	 used	 in	 the	 hospital	 context,	 patients	 assumed	 that	 all	
caregivers	 in	 this	 context	 were	 able	 to	 access	 the	 platform.		
When	 this	 is	 not	 the	 case,	 it	 is	 important	 to	 explicate	 the	
absence	 of	 caregivers,	 given	 that	 the	 system	 is	 used	 in	 this	
hospital	context.		

2.	Allow	relatives	to	join	the	platform	as	well.	This	would	
bring	 patients	 and	 relatives	 closer	 together,	 breaking	 the	
perceived	isolation	of	patients	as	patient.	

9 

	
 
	
	
PervasiveHealth 2018 – IMPAcT Workshop 

B. Vandenberghe et al. 

3.	Indicate	what	information	is	private	and	what	is	shared	
with	others,	such	as	caregivers	or	family	members.	Also,	allow	
patients	 to	 decide	 themselves	 what	 is	 being	 shared	 through	
the	platform.	Again,	not	sharing	specific	aspects	also	provides	
valuable	 information	 to	 the	 caregivers,	 that	 can	 be	 taken	 up	
during	 personal	contacts.	This	 will	 increase	the	 autonomy	of	
the	 patient	 and	 puts	 the	 needs	 of	 the	 patient	 central.	 Some	
people	may	feel	the	need	to	share	with	caregiver	and	family,	
but	others	not.	This	increases	flexibility	of	the	system.	

4.	 Allow	 patients	 to	 justify	 the	 recorded	 data,	 both	 for	
themselves	and	for	their	environment.	For	example,	by	adding	
notes	 to	missing	 data	 and/or	 outliers.	 	 This	 enables	 them	 to	
correct	 for	 errors,	make	mental	 notes	and	 reflect	 upon	 their	
data	and	hence	manage	their	own	condition	better.	

6	 Conclusion	

In	 the	 line	 of	 research	 on	 technology	 appropriation,	 and	
Satchell	 and	 Dourish	 [34]	 their	argument	 that	 non-users	 are	
not	 bad	 users,	 we	 argue	 there	 is	 no	 wrong	 use	 of	 self-
management	 technology	 by	 the	 patient.	 However,	 design	
could	be	improved	in	some	cases	which	could	fit	the	end-user	
better,	taking	into	account	the	patients	mental	model	of	care	
and	how	the	technology	fits	in	there.	While	this	study	is	about	
use,	we	do	argue	our	findings	contain	predictors	for	non-use	
or	 abandonment	 because	 of	 a	 mismatch	 of	 the	 design	
intentions	and	user	perceptions.	We	do	not	call	for	ways	to	fix	
‘the	mistake	at	the	end-users’s	side’	but	do	argue	for	awareness	
regarding	our	findings	when	thinking	about	self-management	
technologies.	 In	 this	 way,	 the	 patients’	 expectations	 and	
perceptions	of	the	PICASSO-Tx	system	can	guide	future	design	
of	self-management	technologies.	

We	 saw	 how	 patients	 still	 have	 certain	 expectations	
towards	 their	 caregivers	 when	 using	 self-management	
technologies.	 Based	 on	 these	 findings,	 we	 argue	 that	 self-
management	 technologies	 can	 be	 successful	 in	 the	 aim	 for	
better	care	if	the	platform	is	not	targeting	its	users	as	patients,	
who	 are	 ill,	 but	 as	 people,	 and	 if	 it	 balances	 the	 benefits	 for	
both	its	users	and	their	environment.	

As	for	the	PICASSO-Tx	system,	this	will	now	be	evaluated	
in	a	randomized	controlled	trial	to	investigate	the	efficacy	of	
the	self-management	technology.	Also,	a	cost-efficiency	study	
will	 examine	 whether	 the	 system	 –	 including	 the	 remaining	
human	effort	–	is	beneficial	from	an	economical	perspective.	If	
both	 studies	 have	 positive	 outcomes,	 the	 system	 will	 be	
adopted	in	regular	post-transplant	care.	

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS	
The	 research	 described	 is	 part	 of	 the	 PICASSO-Tx	 project,	
funded	by	Bijzonder	Onderzoeksfonds	KU	Leuven	(OT	project	
OT13/101).	We	would	like	to	thank	Sabina	De	Geest,	Thierry	
Troosters,	 Patrick	 De	 Mazière,	 Pieter	 Philippaerts,	 Dirk	

10 

Kuypers,	 Frederik	 Nevens,	 Johan	 Vanhaecke,	 Geert	 Verleden,	
Lieven	Dupont,	Diethard	Monbaliu,	Jacques	Pirenne,	Dirk	Van	
Raemdonck,	Johan	Van	Cleemput,	Robin	Vos,	Annette	De	Vito	
Dabbs,	John	Hughes,	and	Bernard	Vrijens.		

REFERENCES	
[1]	 Eric	P.S.	Baumer,	Phil	Adams,	Vera	D.	Khovanskaya,	Tony	C.	Liao,	Madeline	
E.	 Smith,	 Victoria	 Schwanda	 Sosik,	 and	 Kaiton	 Williams.	 2013.	 Limiting,	
Leaving,	and	 (Re)Lapsing:	An	Exploration	of	Facebook	Non-use	Practices	
and	 Experiences.	 In	 Proceedings	 of	 the	 SIGCHI	 Conference	 on	 Human	
Factors	in	Computing	Systems	(CHI	’13).	ACM,	New	York,	NY,	USA,		3257–
3266.	DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466446	

[2]	 Niels	 van	 Berkel,	 Chu	 Luo,	 Denzil	 Ferreira,	 Jorge	 Goncalves,	 and	 Vassilis	
Kostakos.	 2015.	 The	 Curse	 of	 Quantified-self:	 An	 Endless	 Quest	 for	
Answers.	In	Proceedings	 of	the	 2015	ACM	 International	Joint	Conference	
on	Pervasive	and	Ubiquitous	Computing	and	Proceedings	of	the	2015	ACM	
International	 Symposium	 on	 Wearable	 Computers	 (UbiComp	 ’15).	 ACM,	
New	
973–978.	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2800835.2800946	

York,	

USA,	

NY,	

[3]	 Amritpal	Singh	Bhachu,	Nicolas	Hine,	 and	John	Arnott.	2008.	Technology	
Devices	 for	 Older	 Adults	 to	 Aid	 Self	 Management	 of	 Chronic	 Health	
Conditions.	 In	 Proceedings	 of	 the	 10th	 International	 ACM	 SIGACCESS	
Conference	 on	Computers	and	Accessibility	(Assets	’08).	ACM,	New	York,	
NY,	USA,	59–66.	DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1414471.1414484	

[4]	 Uta	Brandes,	Sonja	Stitch,	 and	Miriam	Wender.	2008.	Design	by	Use:	The	
Everyday	 Metamorphosis	 of	 Things.	 Birkhäuser	 GmbH,	 Basel	 Boston,	
Mass.	Berlin.	
Jennie	 Carroll.	 2004.	Completing	 design	in	use:	Closing	the	appropriation	
cycle.	ECIS	2004	Proceedings.	44.	

[5]	

[7]	

[6]	 C.	Charles,	T.	Whelan,	and	A.	Gafni.	1999.	What	do	we	mean	by	partnership	
in	making	decisions	about	treatment?	BMJ	319,	7212	 (September	1999),	
780–782.	
James	Clawson,	Jessica	A.	Pater,	Andrew	D.	Miller,	Elizabeth	D.	Mynatt,	and	
the	
Lena	 Mamykina.	 2015.	 No	 Longer	 Wearing:	
Abandonment	 of	 Personal	 Health-tracking	 Technologies	 on	 Craigslist.	 In	
Proceedings	of	the	2015	ACM	International	Joint	Conference	on	Pervasive	
and	Ubiquitous	Computing	(UbiComp	’15).	ACM,	New	York,	NY,	USA,		647–
658.	DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2807554	

Investigating	

[8]	 Shirley	 Coyle,	 Yanzhe	 Wu,	 King-Tong	 Lau,	 Danilo	 De	 Rossi,	 Gordon	
Wallace,	 and	 Dermot	 Diamond.	 2007.	 Smart	 Nanotextiles:	 A	 Review	 of	
Materials	 and	 Applications.	 MRS	 Bulletin	 32,	 5	 (May	 2007),	 434–442.	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1557/mrs2007.67	

[9]	 Kate	 Crawford,	 Jessa	 Lingel,	 and	 Tero	 Karppi.	 2015.	 Our	 metrics,	
ourselves:	 A	 hundred	 years	 of	 self-tracking	 from	 the	 weight	 scale	 to	 the	
wrist	wearable	 device.	European	Journal	 of	Cultural	Studies	(June	2015).	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1177/1367549415584857	

[10]	 Danielle	 D’Amour,	Lise	Goulet,	Jean-François	Labadie,	Leticia	 San	Martín-
Rodriguez,	 and	 Raynald	 Pineault.	 2008.	 A	 model	 and	 typology	 of	
collaboration	 between	 professionals	 in	 healthcare	 organizations.	 BMC	
Health	
188.	
Res	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-8-188	

(September	

2008),	

Serv	

8,	

[11]	 Jan	Derboven.	2017.	Beyond	Designer’s	Intentions.	A	Semiotic	Exploration	
of	 Technology	 Interpretation	 and	 Appropriation.	 (April	 2017).	 Retrieved	
January	
from	
17,	
https://lirias.kuleuven.be/handle/123456789/579302	

2018	

[12]	 Paul	Dourish.	2003.	The	Appropriation	of	Interactive	Technologies:	Some	
Lessons	 from	 Placeless	 Documents.	 Computer	 Supported	 Cooperative	
465–490.	
(December	
12,	
Work	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1026149119426	

(CSCW)	

2003).	

4	

[13]	 Julie	Doyle,	Niamh	Caprani,	and	Rodd	Bond.	2015.	Older	Adults’	Attitudes	
to	Self-management	of	Health	and	Wellness	Through	Smart	Home	Data.	In	
Proceedings	 of	the	9th	 International	Conference	on	Pervasive	Computing	
Technologies	 for	 Healthcare	 (PervasiveHealth	 ’15).	 ICST	 (Institute	 for	
Computer	
and	 Telecommunications	
Engineering),	ICST,	Brussels,	Belgium,	Belgium,	129–136.	

Social-Informatics	

Sciences,	

[14]	 Daniel	 A.	 Epstein,	 Monica	 Caraway,	 Chuck	 Johnston,	 An	 Ping,	 James	
Fogarty,	and	Sean	A.	Munson.	2016.	Beyond	Abandonment	to	Next	Steps:	
Understanding	and	Designing	for	Life	After	Personal	Informatics	Tool	Use.	
In	 Proceedings	 of	 the	 2016	 CHI	 Conference	 on	 Human	 Factors	 in	
Computing	 Systems	 (CHI	 ’16).	 ACM,	 New	 York,	 NY,	 USA,	 1109–1113.	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858045	

[15]	 BJ	Fogg.	2009.	A	Behavior	Model	for	Persuasive	Design.	In	Proceedings	of	
the	 4th	 International	 Conference	 on	 Persuasive	 Technology	 (Persuasive	

  
	
 
	
	
The ‘Self’ as Barrier for Self-Management Technologies in 
Healthcare? 

’09),	40:1–40:7.	DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1541948.1541999	

[16]	 Verena	Fuchsberger,	Martin	Murer,	and	Manfred	Tscheligi.	2014.	Human-
computer	Non-interaction:	The	Activity	of	Non-use.	In	Proceedings	of	the	
2014	 Companion	 Publication	 on	 Designing	 Interactive	 Systems	 (DIS	
Companion	
57–60.	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2598784.2602781	

York,	

ACM,	

USA,	

New	

’14).	

NY,	

[17]	 Susan	 Gasson.	 2003.	 Human-centered	 vs.	 user-centered	 approaches	 to	
information	 system	 design.	 JITTA :	 Journal	 of	 Information	 Technology	
Theory	and	Application;	Hong	Kong	5,	2	(2003),	29–46.	

[18]	 Kevin	Gaunt,	Júlia	Nacsa,	and	Marcel	Penz.	2014.	Baby	Lucent:	Pitfalls	of	
Applying	Quantified	Self	to	Baby	Products.	In	CHI	’14	Extended	Abstracts	
on	 Human	 Factors	 in	 Computing	 Systems	 (CHI	 EA	 ’14).	 ACM,	 New	 York,	
NY,	USA,	263–268.	DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2559206.2580937	
[19]	 Daniel	 Harrison,	 Paul	 Marshall,	 Nadia	 Bianchi-Berthouze,	 and	 Jon	 Bird.	
2015.	 Activity	 Tracking:	 Barriers,	 Workarounds	 and	 Customisation.	 In	
Proceedings	of	the	2015	ACM	International	Joint	Conference	on	Pervasive	
and	Ubiquitous	Computing	(UbiComp	’15).	ACM,	New	York,	NY,	USA,	617–
621.	DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2805832	

[20]	 Hayati	 Havlucu,	 Idil	 Bostan,	 Aykut	 Coskun,	 and	 Öuzhan	 Özcan.	 2017.	
Understanding	 the	 Lonesome	 Tennis	 Players:	 Insights	
for	 Future	
Wearables.	In	Proceedings	of	the	2017	CHI	Conference	Extended	Abstracts	
on	 Human	 Factors	 in	 Computing	 Systems	 (CHI	 EA	 ’17).	 ACM,	 New	 York,	
NY,	USA,	1678–1685.	DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/3027063.3053102	
[21]	 Sari	Kujala	and	Kaisa	Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila.	2008.	Value	of	Information	
Systems	and	Products:	Understanding	the	Users’	Perspective	and	Values.	
JITTA :	 Journal	 of	 Information	 Technology	 Theory	 and	 Application;	 Hong	
Kong	9,	4	(2008),	23–39.	

[22]	 Victor	R.	Lee	and	Mary	Briggs.	2014.	Lessons	Learned	from	an	Initial	Effort	
to	Bring	a	Quantified	Self	“Meetup”	Experience	to	a	New	Demographic.	In	
Proceedings	of	the	2014	ACM	International	Joint	Conference	on	Pervasive	
and	 Ubiquitous	 Computing:	 Adjunct	 Publication	 (UbiComp	 ’14	 Adjunct).	
ACM,	
707–710.	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2638728.2641321	

York,	

USA,	

New	

NY,	

[23]	 Ian	Li,	Anind	Dey,	and	Jodi	Forlizzi.	2010.	A	Stage-based	Model	of	Personal	
Informatics	Systems.	In	Proceedings	of	the	 SIGCHI	Conference	on	Human	
Factors	 in	 Computing	 Systems	 (CHI	 ’10).	 ACM,	 New	 York,	 NY,	 USA,	 557–
566.	DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753409	

[24]	 Ian	 Li,	 Anind	 K.	 Dey,	 and	 Jodi	 Forlizzi.	 2011.	 Understanding	 My	 Data,	
Myself:	 Supporting	 Self-reflection	 with	 Ubicomp	 Technologies.	
In	
Proceedings	 of	 the	 13th	 International	 Conference	 on	 Ubiquitous	
Computing	 (UbiComp	
’11).	 ACM,	 New	 York,	 NY,	 USA,	 405–414.	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2030112.2030166	

PervasiveHealth 2018 – IMPAcT Workshop 

digital	cameras.	J.	Am.	Soc.	 Inf.	 Sci.	62,	12	(December	2011),	2347–2363.	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1002/asi.21643	

[34]	 Christine	Satchell	and	Paul	Dourish.	2009.	Beyond	the	User:	Use	and	Non-
use	in	HCI.	In	Proceedings	of	the	21st	Annual	Conference	of	the	Australian	
Computer-Human	 Interaction	 Special	 Interest	 Group:	 Design:	 Open	 24/7	
9–16.	
ACM,	
(OZCHI	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/1738826.1738829	

York,	

USA,	

New	

’09).	

NY,	

[35]	 Will	Simm,	Maria	Angela	Ferrario,	Adrian	Gradinar,	Marcia	Tavares	Smith,	
Stephen	Forshaw,	Ian	 Smith,	and	Jon	Whittle.	2016.	Anxiety	 and	Autism:	
Towards	 Personalized	 Digital	 Health.	 In	 Proceedings	 of	 the	 2016	 CHI	
Conference	on	Human	Factors	in	Computing	Systems	(CHI	’16).	ACM,	New	
1270–1281.	
NY,	
York,	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858259	

USA,	

[36]	 Thor	 Jarle	 J.	 Skinstad	 and	 Babak	 A.	 Farshchian.	 2016.	 Empowerment	 or	
Concealed	 Compliance?:	 A	 Review	 of	 Literature	 on	 Mobile	 ICT	 Solutions	
for	 Patient	 Empowerment.	 In	 Proceedings	 of	 the	 9th	 ACM	 International	
Conference	on	PErvasive	Technologies	Related	to	Assistive	Environments	
(PETRA	’16).	ACM,	New	York,	NY,	USA,	Article	54,	4	pages.	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2910674.2910710	

[37]	 Melanie	 Swan.	 2009.	 Emerging	 patient-driven	 health	 care	 models:	 an	
examination	 of	 health	 social	 networks,	 consumer	 personalized	 medicine	
and	 quantified	 self-tracking.	 Int	 J	 Environ	 Res	 Public	 Health	 6,	 2	 (2009),	
492–525.	DOI:https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph6020492	

through	 Crowdsourcing,	

[38]	 Melanie	 Swan.	 2012.	 Health	 2050:	 The	 Realization	 of	 Personalized	
Medicine	
the	
Participatory	 Biocitizen.	 J	 Pers	 Med	 2,	 3	 (September	 2012),	 93–118.	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.3390/jpm2030093	
Melanie	 Swan.	 2013.	 The	 Quantified	 Self:	 Fundamental	 Disruption	 in	 Big	
Data	 Science	 and	 Biological	 Discovery.	 Big	 Data	 1,	 2	 (June	 2013),	 85–99.	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1089/big.2012.0002	

the	 Quantified	 Self,	 and	

[39]
_	

[40]		 Bert	 Vandenberghe,	 Jasper	 Vanhoof,	 Fabienne	 Dobbels,	 David	 Geerts.	
2015.	Rome	Wasn’t	Reached	in	 a	Day:	How	to	Motivate	Patients	to	Keep	
Walking?	In	INTERACT	2015	Adjunct	Proceedings.	University	of	Bamberg	
Press,	Bamberg,	Germany.	399-403	

[25]	 Deborah	Lupton.	2012.	Medicine	as	Culture:	Illness,	Disease	and	the	Body	
from	

(3rd	
http://sk.sagepub.com/books/medicine-as-culture-3e	

Retrieved	

London.	

January	

2018	

ed.).	

23,	

[26]	 Deborah	Lupton.	2012.	M-health	and	health	promotion:	The	digital	cyborg	
and	surveillance	society.	Soc	Theory	Health	10,	3	(August	2012),	229–244.	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1057/sth.2012.6	

[27]	 Deborah	 Lupton.	 2013.	 Quantifying	 the	 body:	 monitoring	 and	 measuring	
health	 in	 the	 age	 of	 mHealth	 technologies.	 Critical	 Public	 Health	 23,	 4	
(December	
393–403.	
2013),	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1080/09581596.2013.794931	

[28]	 Ananthidewi	Maniam,	Jaspaljeet	Singh	Dhillon,	and	Nilufar	Baghaei.	2015.	
Determinants	 of	 Patients’	 Intention	 to	 Adopt	 Diabetes	 Self-Management	
Applications.	 In	 Proceedings	 of	 the	 15th	 New	 Zealand	 Conference	 on	
Human-Computer	 Interaction	 (CHINZ	 2015).  ACM,	 New	 York,	 NY,	 USA,		
43–50.	DOI:https://doi.org/10.1145/2808047.2808059	

[29]	 Miriam	 McMullan.	 2006.	 Patients	 using	 the	 Internet	 to	 obtain	 health	
information:	how	this	affects	the	patient-health	professional	relationship.	
Patient	
24–28.	
Couns	
DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pec.2005.10.006	

(October	

2006),	

Educ	

1-2	

63,	

[30]	 Jean-Francois	 De	 Moya	 and	 Jessie	 Pallud.	 2017.	 QUANTIFIED	 SELF:	 A	
LITERATURE	 REVIEW	 BASED	 ON	 THE	 FUNNEL	 PARADIGM.	 Research	
Papers	(June	2017),	1678–1694.	

[31]	 Toluwalogo	B.	Odumosu.	2009.	Interrogating	mobiles:	A	story	of	Nigerian	
appropriation	 of	 the	 mobile	 phone.	 Rensselaer	 Polytechnic	 Institute,	
from	
United	 States	
https://search.proquest.com/docview/304986497/abstract/494CD3A2F
484F9CPQ/1	

--	 New	 York.	 Retrieved	

January	 17,	 2018	

[32]	 J.	 Richter,	 M.	 Eisemann,	 and	 E.	 Zgonnikova.	 2001.	 Doctors’	
authoritarianism	
in	 end-of-life	 treatment	 decisions.	 A	 comparison	
between	 Russia,	 Sweden	 and	 Germany.	 J	 Med	 Ethics	 27,	 3	 (June	 2001),	
186–191.	DOI:https://doi.org/10.1136/jme.27.3.186	

[33]	 Antti	 Salovaara,	 Sacha	 Helfenstein,	 and	 Antti	 Oulasvirta.	 2011.	 Everyday	
appropriations	 of	 information	 technology:	 A	 study	 of	 creative	 uses	 of	

11 

	
 
	
	
	
