Time for Break: Understanding Information Workers’
Sedentary Behavior Through a Break Prompting System
Bongshin Lee
Microsoft Research
Redmond, WA, USA
bongshin@microsoft.com

Yuhan Luo
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
yuhanluo@umd.edu

Donghee Yvette Wohn
New Jersey Institute of
Technology
Newark, NJ, USA
wohn@njit.edu

Amanda L. Rebar
Central Queensland University
Queensland, Australia
a.rebar@cqu.edu.au

David E. Conroy
The Pennsylvania State
University
University Park, PA, USA
conroy@psu.edu

Eun Kyoung Choe
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
choe@umd.edu

ABSTRACT
Extended periods of uninterrupted sedentary behavior are detri-
mental to long-term health. While prolonged sitting is preva-
lent among information workers, it is difﬁcult for them to break
prolonged sedentary behavior due to the nature of their work.
This work aims to understand information workers’ intentions
& practices around standing or moving breaks. We developed
Time for Break, a break prompting system that enables people
to set their desired work duration and prompts them to stand
up or move. We conducted an exploratory ﬁeld study (N =
25) with Time for Break to collect participants’ work & break
intentions and behaviors for three weeks, followed by semi-
structured interviews. We examined rich contexts affecting
participants’ receptiveness to standing or moving breaks, and
identiﬁed how their habit strength and self-regulation are re-
lated to their break-taking intentions & practices. We discuss
design implications for interventions to break up periods of
prolonged sedentary behavior in workplaces.

ACM Classiﬁcation Keywords
H.5.m Information Interfaces and Presentation (e.g. HCI): Mis-
cellaneous; K.4.1 Computers and Society: Computer-related
health issues.

Author Keywords
Sedentary behavior; workplace setting; information workers;
break; personal informatics.

INTRODUCTION
Information workers are generally sedentary, spending most
of their days working in front of a desk-bound computer [47,

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, Canada.
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5620-6/18/04 ...$15.00.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173701

53, 60]. Unfortunately, this prolonged sedentary behavior is
closely linked with an increased risk of developing chronic
diseases and mortality [29, 30, 41, 52, 68]. Furthermore,
regular physical activities cannot fully compensate for the
harm caused by prolonged sedentary behavior [3, 7]. Thus, a
healthy work routine requires breaking up extended periods of
sedentary behavior beyond solely increasing physical activity
or limiting total sedentary time [23, 52].

In the HCI community, researchers have studied technolog-
ical interventions to encourage information workers to take
breaks (e.g., prompting system [8, 65], tangible interface [56],
game-like system [12, 49]). However, for most of these in-
terventions, their primary goal was to promote a break from
prolonged work, not from prolonged sitting. It is important to
note that breaks do not necessarily make people get up from
their seats because it is easy to stay sedentary during breaks
(e.g., watching a video or playing a game while sitting [6, 49]).

In addition, taking breaks too frequently during work hours can
disrupt information workers’ productivity despite its health
beneﬁts [37, 38, 45]. Thus, to promote a healthy and sus-
tainable break habit, it is important to ﬁnd the right balance
between the two seemingly conﬂicting goals: to take breaks
that counter sedentary behavior and to be productive.

In this work, we set out to investigate ways to help infor-
mation workers break prolonged sedentary behavior while
maintaining work productivity. Given that sedentary behavior
is a strong habitual behavior [16, 44], breaking prolonged
sedentary behavior is a long-term process. As a ﬁrst step, we
examined the contexts around information workers’ work &
break behavior excluding those who use sit-stand desk. We
developed Time for Break (Figure 1), a desktop-based prompt-
ing system that enables people to set up their preferred work
and break duration, and sends a prompt for moving breaks
(i.e., breaks that involve standing or moving) according to
personalized settings. From a three-week ﬁeld study with 25
information workers, we collected qualitative and quantitative

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 127Page 1desk-bound computer for a long period of time [47, 53, 60].
More than 70% of U.S. employees spend over eight hours
working during weekdays [50]. Their sitting time amounts to
more than 80% of the work hours [53], which is about two
hours longer than their sitting time during leisure days [47].

A common misunderstanding is that regular physical activities
can fully compensate for the harm of prolonged sedentary
behavior. Contrary to this belief, scientiﬁc evidence shows
that the nature of prolonged sedentary behavior is different
from lack of exercise [3]. For example, those who spend the
majority of their days sitting can still suffer from the health
risks caused by prolonged sedentary behavior, even if they
meet the recommended levels of physical activity (e.g., 60-
minute moderate physical activities per day) [3, 7].

Recognizing the harmfulness of prolonged sedentary behavior,
researchers designed mobile applications (e.g., B-Mobile [8],
SitCoach [65]) to reduce prolonged sitting by sending regular
prompts. Notably, modifying the workplace environment such
as installing sit-stand desks [1, 13] and treadmill workstations
[39] continues to gain ground. Although some researchers ob-
served a signiﬁcant reduction in total sitting time with sit-stand
desks [1, 13], other studies showed that the use of sit-stand
desks depends on personal willingness, which varied among
people [28]. In addition, while researcher focus on measuring
total sitting and active time using these interventions, it re-
mains unclear whether the sitting time was effectively broken
up, thereby preventing prolonged sedentary behaviors. To
examine alternative strategies to reduce sedentary behavior,
Maher and colleagues leveraged action planning by having
people submit a detailed daily plan of when, where, and how
they will engage in physical activity or limiting prolonged
sitting time via email [44]. However, this approach was not
effective in reducing sedentary behavior.

Breaking prolonged sedentary behavior is still a challenge for
most people due to its strong habitual nature [44, 57]. To inves-
tigate the key factors that regulate sedentary behavior, Conroy
and colleagues conducted a 14-day ecological momentary as-
sessment study combined with wearable accelerometers [16].
They found that sedentary behavior was regulated by both
habit (automatic process) and intentions (reﬂective process).
Inspired by their work, we measured the habit strength and
self-regulation in relation to taking moving breaks to further
explore how information workers’ habit strength and self-
regulation relate to their break-taking intentions & practices.

Promoting Breaks in Workplaces
To promote healthy work routines for information work-
ers, HCI researchers have designed interventions to promote
breaks in workplaces. A common approach is using prompt-
based systems, which remind people to take breaks by leverag-
ing desktop computers (e.g., Time Out [62], SuperBreak [49])
or mobile phones (e.g., BreakSense [12]). Speciﬁcally, Super-
Break and BreakSense are game-like systems that encourage
breaks in workplaces. SuperBreak sends out prompts to en-
courage people to take regular and frequent microbreaks (i.e.,
a 25-second break every eight minutes of working) by having
them brieﬂy read a document, play an interactive game, or

Figure 1. Time for Break’s break prompt dialogue (a), and a follow up
question depending on people’s response. When they answer “yes,” they
enter the intended break duration (b). When they answer “no,” they
enter reasons for not taking a break (c).

data on participants’ work and break intentions & practices us-
ing Time for Break. We found signiﬁcant trends on their habit
strength and self-regulation in taking moving breaks, as well
as their work and break intentions & practices. Through semi-
structured interviews, we learned how participants’ break-
taking intentions & practices vary in different contexts.

The ﬁrst contribution of this work is an empirical understand-
ing of information workers’ intentions & practices to take
moving breaks, including the gaps between intentions and
behaviors, work and break preferences, and the contexts and
reasons regarding their choices. The second contribution is a
set of design implications for interventions that aim to break
prolonged sedentary behavior while maintaining work pro-
ductivity, and more broadly, suggesting information workers’
long-term health as an important design value to consider.

In what follows, we ﬁrst provide related work and present three
research questions. After detailing the design of the Time for
Break, we describe the ﬁeld study and report results to answer
the research questions. We discuss design implications for
building effective interventions to help information workers
break sedentary behavior and create a healthy work routine.

RELATED WORK
In this section, we cover related work in deﬁning and un-
derstanding sedentary behavior, and interventions aiming to
reduce sedentary behavior. We also described interventions
designed to promote breaks in workplaces and to reduce work
interruptions in the HCI community.

Sedentary Behavior
Sedentary behavior is generally deﬁned as waking behavior
with low energy expenditure in a seated, reclined, or lying pos-
ture [4, 64]. Sedentary behavior often involves activities such
as reading, watching TV, and using a computer while seated
[6, 54]. Researchers found that prolonged sedentary behavior
increases risks for diabetes [29], cardiovascular disease [68],
obesity [32], and other chronic diseases [40, 51]. Recently,
information workers have increasingly become prone to pro-
longed sedentary behavior because they usually work on the

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 127Page 2watch a video [49]. SuperBreak was effective in engaging peo-
ple in taking microbreaks, but it could interrupt their ﬂow of
work. BreakSense leverages location sensing to detect people’
physical break (e.g., going to the restroom) and invite them
to play exergames to extend the break duration [12]. While
BreakSense encouraged people to take longer moving breaks,
it did not initiate the breaks. Furthermore, it could discourage
people from going back to work.

To understand the effects of different types of work breaks
on information workers’ productivity, Epstein and colleagues
conducted a web-based diary study combined with a survey
and interview [24]. They identiﬁed that participants took
longer digital and social breaks than they intended, but shorter
necessary break, physical break, and outdoors break than they
intended. We note that in workplaces, “taking breaks” does
not necessarily help people reduce sedentary behaviors: many
existing interventions encourage any work breaks, and people
can easily engage in sedentary activities during breaks (e.g.,
checking on social media or watching videos) [24, 49].

It has been challenging to identify the “appropriate prompting
moments” (i.e., when people are receptive and responsive)
when designing prompting systems in workplaces. Prompting
people at inappropriate moments can introduce unnecessary
interruptions and inﬂuence their productivity [2, 19, 36]. In the
HCI community, many researchers have examined interrupt-
ibility in workplaces [33, 35, 70]. For example, Hudson and
colleagues constructed a machine learning model to predict hu-
man interruptibility based on their observation on the contexts
around information workers [33]. Iqbal and Bailey examined
opportune moments for interruption with a workload-aligned
model, and found that the “best” moment to interrupt people
was when they were working on tasks with low workload [35].
However, interruptible moments that are optimized for work
productivity are not identical with prompting moments for
breaking extended periods of uninterrupted sitting.

In contrast to the works mentioned above, we aim to explore
ways to break information workers’ prolonged sedentary be-
haviors by ﬁrst understanding their work and break intentions
& practices. In addition, our work extends the prior research
by addressing information workers’ habit strength and self-
regulation in relation to break-taking behaviors for long-term
habit development. In this light, we consider only “standing
or moving” breaks as breaks in our study: the term, “moving
breaks” in the remaining sections of the paper refers to breaks
that involve standing or moving. We also assume that infor-
mation workers sit while working and we use sitting duration
and work duration interchangeably.

TIME FOR BREAK
We designed Time for Break as a data collection and prompting
tool to answer the following three research questions:

• RQ1: What are information workers’ intended work and

break duration and their actual practices?

• RQ2: What are reasons and contexts around information

workers’ break-taking intentions and practices?

• RQ3: How do information workers’ habit strength and
self-regulation relate to their break-taking intentions and
practices?

Design Goals
To answer the three research questions listed above, we aim to
design Time for Break as a data collection tool, for autonomy,
exploratory purpose, and minimal distraction.

Design for Autonomy
Many prompting systems imposed the ﬁxed duration for work
and break (e.g., 5-minute break after every 60-minute sitting)
on all participants throughout the study (e.g., [65, 55]). In
contrast, to provide people with control over their schedule, we
allow them to change their preferred work duration every day.
In addition, people are free to accept, decline, or ignore each
break prompt depending on their contexts. Once they accept to
take a break, people can set an intended break duration. This
ensures that people have the autonomy to decide on their work
& break schedules, to dismiss the prompt when necessary, and
to set different break duration in different contexts.

Design for Exploratory Purposes
For the exploratory purposes of understanding information
workers’ break intentions & practices, we design Time for
Break to collect people’s work & break contexts instead of
changing their current break & work habits. In Fogg’s term,
the break prompt in our study serves as a signal (i.e., a re-
minder that does not change one’s motivation or ability to
perform the target behavior) [25], simply indicating that it is
the time to take a moving break rather than persuading people
to take a break. Thus, we did not provide any feedback on
people’s responses or break-taking behaviors, and carefully
designed the break prompt using neutral wording (e.g., no en-
couraging wording for accepting a break or discouraging word-
ing for declining a break). Despite these design choices, we
note that Time for Break could change people’s break-taking
intention and behavior through an act of self-monitoring.

Design for Minimal Distraction
As information workers are generally busy with their work,
there are times when they do not want to take any break or
even do not have time to respond to the prompt. Given that
the break prompt can be a distraction in itself, we strove to
minimize distraction. Time for Break shows the break prompt
at the bottom-right corner of the screen, and automatically
closes it after two minutes if people have not responded yet.
Additionally, if people are typing or clicking the mouse, Time
for Break postpones showing the break prompt by 15 seconds
to avoid interrupting people’s ﬂow of work.

Time for Break Design
Time for Break consists of a work duration setting window,
a break prompt window (Figure 1), a break window (with a
break timer), and a work timer. People can set their preferred
work duration (i.e., for how long they want to continuously
work before being prompted) on the work duration setting
window once a day every day. People can see how long they
have been working by hovering over the work timer in a tray
icon located on the Windows notiﬁcation area. Time for Break

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 127Page 3Figure 2. Time for Break interaction ﬂow.

does not provide any other feedback on participants’ break-
taking activities or responses. Inspired by Experience Sam-
pling Method [17, 43, 46], Time for Break sends out prompts
to collect people’s break-taking intention and contexts in-situ.

Experience Sampling Method (ESM)
Experience Sampling Method (ESM) is a research method that
asks people to self-report their behavioral and mental aspects
repeatedly in real time [17, 43]. It is proven to be valid in
identifying between-subjects differences as well as within-
subjects differences on people’s intentions and behaviors [31].

Originating from psychology, ESM has been widely used in
studies conducted in workplaces. For example, Mark and
colleagues deployed a desktop-based ESM system to examine
the association between information workers’ attentional states
and the workplace context [46]. Fullagar and colleagues also
used ESM to investigate the relationship between ﬂow (i.e., a
comprehensive measure of optimal experience) and subjective
well-being of architecture students [26]. Moreover, to support
ESM studies in the wild, many open-source research tools
such as PACO [21] and Experience Sampler [63] are available.

In natural settings, ESM has certain limitations such as self-
selection bias and data quality concerns [58]. Nevertheless,
researchers can reduce the limitations through recruiting par-
ticipants with sufﬁcient motivation to complete the study or
minimizing the response burden [18, 34]. Overall, ESM is a
powerful approach to link people’s current experience with
contexts and to surface the rationale behind their overt be-
havior [58].
Inspired by the ESM approach, we designed
Time for Break as a data collection tool that sends out in-situ
prompts proximal to people’s action, although our study does
not strictly follow the traditional ESM design. Thus, Time
for Break can be best described as an exploratory prompting

tool to collect people’s behavioral and attitudinal data in a
semi-controlled ﬁeld deployment study [59].

Interaction Flow
A person receives the break prompt after an uninterrupted
computer active time that equals to the work duration he or
she set daily. Locking the machine stops and resets the work
timer. Upon receiving a prompt, the person can respond with
“Yes, great idea!” to accept taking the break, “No, I can’t right
now.” to decline, or simply ignore it (i.e., does not interact
with it) based on his or her current state (Figure 2).

• If the person responds “Yes, great idea!,” Time for Break
asks for how long the person wants to take the break (Figure
1b). After entering an intended break duration, the person
has 10 seconds to wrap up current work (e.g., close a win-
dow). After the 10 seconds, the break window (with the
break timer) appears and the break mode begins.
The person can go back to work whenever he or she wants;
interacting with the machine (i.e., pressing any keys or
clicking anywhere on the screen) begins the work mode.
In addition, the person can begin the work mode using the
break window; the person can click the “Exit Break Mode”
button or the “Go Back to Work” button (after the break
duration is passed, the break window replaces the “Exit
Break Mode” button with the “Go Back to Work” button).
Time for Break estimates the break duration based on the
computer’s inactive time during a break.

• If the person responds “No, I can’t right now.,” Time for
Break asks the reason why he or she cannot take the break
at the moment (Figure 1c). The dialogue box disappears
after two minutes if the person ignores it.

• If the person ignores the break prompt, it automatically
disappears after two minutes, and a new work cycle begins.

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 127Page 4Implementation
We built Time for Break as a Windows desktop application
in C# with Windows Presentation Foundation (WPF). Time
for Break transfers the collected data such as people’s work
duration settings and responses to the prompt to the database
(MySQL) located in a secure server. To make Time for Break
run all the time, we automatically launch it when the machine
starts. To ensure people set only one work duration every
day, Time for Break pops the work duration setting window by
keeping track of the date of the latest work duration setting.

METHOD
We conducted a three-week ﬁeld study with Time for Break
at a large state university in the U.S. to explore information
workers’ work and break intentions & practices. Our study
was approved by the university’s Institutional Review Board.

Participants
We advertised the study through the university mailing list and
university research volunteer website. Among the 42 people
who responded, 26 met the following inclusion criteria: in-
dividuals who (1) are over 18; (2) use a Windows machine
(laptop or desktop) more than six hours a day on workdays;
(3) have administrator rights to install Time for Break on their
machine; (4) have Internet access; and (5) do not use a sit-
stand desk. In addition, we purposely recruited people who are
interested in breaking prolonged sedentary behavior. One par-
ticipant dropped out of the study because of family emergency.
Among the 25 participants who completed all the study activi-
ties, seven were male, and 18 were female. Their age ranges
from 24 to 60 (M = 39.12, SD = 2.55). Five participants were
graduate students (4 in Information Sciences, 1 in Aerospace),
one was a postdoctoral scholar (Statistics), and 19 were uni-
versity staff members (4 administrators, 3 IT consultants, 3
ﬁnancial assistants, 2 research staff, 2 data analysts, 1 facili-
ties coordinator, 1 business manager, 1 corporation relation, 1
events coordinator, 1 career consultant).

Study Procedure
The study procedure consists of ﬁve stages: (1) pre-study ques-
tionnaire, (2) pre-study tutorial, (3) three-week data collection
with Time for Break, (4) post-study questionnaire, and (5) op-
tional post-study interview. Each participant received a $30
Amazon gift card as compensation at the end of the study.
Those who participated in the optional post-study interview
received an extra $10 Amazon gift card.

Pre-Study Questionnaire
The pre-study questionnaire was administered via a web sur-
vey, which covered the study consent, basic demographic infor-
mation, motivations to take moving breaks during work hours,
and self-reported habit strength and self-regulation in taking
moving breaks1. Habit strength was measured by the 4-item
automaticity subscale from the Self-Report Habit Index [66].
This measure has validated psychometric properties from prior
research, which is widely used for measuring habit strength
1We note that sedentary behavior is in general a strong habitual
behavior, which is insensitive to self-reported measures; therefore, re-
searchers often measure an opposite behavior to the habitual behavior
[44], that is, “taking moving breaks” in our case.

for behaviors [16, 44, 27]. Self-regulation was measured by a
6-item subscale from the Self-Regulation Questionnaire (SRQ)
[10], and was tailored to assess participants’ ability to develop,
implement, and keep a plan of breaking prolonged sitting. This
measure has been used to assess various behaviors including
physical activities and sedentary behavior [11].

Pre-Study Tutorial
After the pre-study questionnaire, we scheduled a pre-study
tutorial with each participant in-person (n = 18), over Skype
(n = 4), and via phone call (n = 3). During the 20-minute
tutorial, we helped participants install Time for Break on their
machines, and instructed them in setting up a work duration
and responding to the break prompt. We emphasized that the
“breaks” in this study mean breaks that involve standing up or
moving, and that the study compensation is not tied to their
responses to the break prompts.

Data Collection with Time for Break
Right after the pre-study tutorial, participants started to use
and respond to Time for Break for the next three weeks. Dur-
ing the three-week data collection period, we did not contact
the participants. Two participants reached us to seek help in
reinstalling Time for Break due to system upgrade, and three
notiﬁed us of their one-day leave off work via email.

Post-Study Questionnaire
The post-study questionnaire consisted of the same questions
on participants’ habit strength and self-regulation in taking
moving breaks during work hours. We also asked participants’
qualitative feedback on their experience with Time for Break,
such as new features they would like to see and additional
information they wanted to share with us.

Optional Post-Study Interview
After the post-study questionnaire, participants had an option
to participate in a post-study interview. We interviewed 23
participants (in-person (n = 18), Skype (n = 3), phone call
(n = 2)) out of 25. The interview was semi-structured, and
lasted from 20 to 60 minutes. During the interview, we asked
participants to talk about their experience with Time for Break,
such as their work and break preferences, why they accept or
decline to take breaks upon receiving the break prompt, and
their perceived productivity during the study period. We also
asked them what they learned from the study, and what they
liked and disliked about Time for Break.

Data Analysis
In this section, we describe the data we collected from each
study stage and the methods we used to perform data analysis.

Questionnaire Data Analysis
We used open coding to categorize participants’ motivations
to take moving breaks during work hours. We also digitized
participants’ qualitative feedback on Time for Break from the
post-study questionnaire. We conducted paired-samples t-tests
to compare participants’ pre- and post-study habit strength and
self-regulation in taking moving breaks during work hours.

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 127Page 5Log Data Analyses
We summarized the descriptive results from the log data of
Time for Break, including daily work duration, response la-
tency (i.e., the time span between when participants received
the break prompt and when they submitted their responses),
responses to the prompts (i.e., “yes,” “no,” or ignore), intended
break duration, actual break duration, and reasons for not
taking breaks. We excluded 17 out of 542 (3.1%) free-form
text entries because they were unrecognizable (e.g., random
letters, pure numbers, and symbols). We classiﬁed the remain-
ing entries into different types of reasons for not take breaks
using thematic analysis.

To analyze the quantitative data, we ﬁrst conducted a Box-
Cox transformation [9] on the variables that had a skew value
> 1.5 (i.e., work duration, response latency, intended break
duration, and actual break duration). We then calculated
the Intra-class Correlations (ICC) [69] of work duration, re-
sponse latency, intended break duration, and actual break
duration to ﬁnd out how much variation was due to between-
subjects differences (i.e., how stable versus malleable these
variables were). We then used linear and logistic multilevel
modeling [5] to examine what between- and within-subjects
factors predicted work duration, response latency, intended
break duration, actual break duration, and changes of habit-
strength and self-regulation from pre-study to post-study. In
addition, we set up a linear multilevel model to test whether
the variability in a person’s work duration, response latency,
intended break duration, and actual break duration (i.e., person-
level standard deviations controlled for person-level means
of each variable) impacted the degree of habit strength and
self-regulation change across the study.

Interview Data Analysis
The interview provided more details on participants’ rationales
of their log data and their break-taking intentions & practices.
We audio recorded and transcribed all 23 interviews. Based
on the framework of qualitative analysis [48], two researchers
used bottom-up thematic analysis to identify emerging themes
through iterative coding. One of the coders was not involved
in the interviews, ensuring an independent perspective. The re-
search team discussed major themes and established recurring
codes of participants’ motivation to take moving breaks, work
and break preferences, and experience with Time for Break.

RESULTS
Over the course of three weeks, Time for Break collected
374 days of work duration settings and delivered 1,599 break
prompts, in which there were 642 (40%) responses of “yes”
and 542 (34%) responses of “no.” The remaining 415 (26%)
break prompts were ignored by participants. The average re-
sponse latency to the prompt was 23.57 seconds (SD = 27.91),
excluding the cases when the prompt was ignored. Here, we
report our ﬁndings according to the three research questions
presented earlier. To ensure the conﬁdentiality of participants,
we assigned a participant identiﬁer (P#) to each participant.

RQ1: Information Workers’ Intended Work & Break Dura-

tion and Their Actual Practices
In general, participants had different preferences in setting
their work duration, but similar preferences in setting their

intended break duration. Here, we describe the similarities
and differences on participants’ intended work duration and
break duration, as well as their actual practices.

Work Duration
The log data showed that (1) most variability in work duration
setting was at the between-subjects level (ICC = .70): par-
ticipants typically set their work duration with less variance
each day compared to the variance between participants; and
(2) in the range of work duration from 20 to 120 minutes, 60
minutes was most prevalent, as 172 out of 374 (46%) daily
work duration was set to 60 minutes. On the last day of the
study, 13 participants set 60 minutes as their work duration,
and among them, ﬁve participants (P5, P7, P10, P12, P25)
kept a 60-minute work duration throughout the study.

We found that participants preferred 60-minute work duration
because it is (1) manageable: “I pushed it to 60 [minutes],
and that generally speaking became manageable ... at least
a reasonable starting point and knowing throughout the day
that some time of the day you need to get up” (P11); (2) easy
to track: “... it’s easier to keep track on it by hour, kind of in
my head without tracking the icon” (P19); and (3) neither too
short nor too long: “I think the longer times were too long.
The shorter ones were too short, like it was popping up all the
time. So I was either having to say no or I couldn’t do the way
with so many pop ups” (P18).

However, it was common for participants to change the work
duration depending on their schedule. For example, P15 usu-
ally set the work duration that is longer than her meeting
duration so that she can avoid receiving a break prompt during
the meeting: “... if I have meetings for 30 minutes long, I tried
to set [work duration] for 45 to an hour.” But her meeting
duration changed from day to day, which made her frequently
adjust the work duration. Similarly, P13 set her work duration
based on whether she would be busy during the day: “There
were days I need to work for a longer time so I set 90 [minutes].
The other days I set 60 [minutes].”

Break Duration
With paired-samples t-tests, we found a signiﬁcant difference
between participants’ average intended break duration (M =
4.42, SD = 5.42) and actual break duration (M = 5.92, SD =
11.88) in minutes, t(641) = -3.922, d = .16, p < .001. Using
linear multilevel modeling, we found the following set of
trends on participants’ intended and actual break duration with
their work duration, response latency and the study days.

Intended Break Duration: The log data showed that (1) most
variability in intended break duration was at within-subjects
level (ICC = .13): each participant’s intended break duration
varied more across the study period compared to the variance
between participants; (2) participants who set longer work du-
ration on average tended to set longer intended break duration
(b = .40, p < .001); (3) participants’ intended break duration
signiﬁcantly decreased over time (b = -.03, p < .001); and (4)
those who responded slower to the prompt on average tended
to set longer intended break duration (b = .02, p < .001).

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 127Page 6From the interviews, we learned that participants set their
break duration based on what break activities they were going
to do: “If I go to restroom or stretch my leg I usually set it
longer. If I’m just looking around and getting away from my
desk, it’s usually just 1 minute” (P14). Whereas sometimes
they decided their break duration based on how much work
they had done: “If I had accomplished a lot, I would say, okay,
I would just take a longer break. If I had less accomplished
than I would like to, I was like I’m going [to] get this done
and the break can be short” (P1).

The intended break duration ranged from 1 to 60 minutes.
Seven participants kept the same break duration all the time,
and among them, ﬁve (P2, P3, P6, P12, P23) kept it at 5
minutes, one (P7) kept it at 3 minutes, and one (P9) kept it at
2 minutes. These participants considered the break duration
they input every time as a minimum duration for break: “I
think 5 minutes was like something in my head about what I
should be taking at minimum” (P23), “I wanted to make sure
I walked away for at least 3 minutes” (P7).

Actual Break Duration: The log data showed that (1) most of
variability in actual break duration was at within-subjects level
(ICC = .09): each participant’s actual break duration varied
more across the study period compared to the variance between
participants; (2) at the between-subjects level, participants’
actual break duration was not consistent with their intended
break duration (b = 37.12, p = .846); (3) at the within-subjects
level, when participants set longer intended break duration
than usual, they actually took longer breaks (b = 453.53, p
< .001); and (4) nine participants took signiﬁcantly longer
breaks than they intended, and two took signiﬁcantly shorter
breaks than they intended.

Taking longer break than intended was usually due to inciden-
tal socializing: “got caught in the hallway talking to somebody”
(P9). Due to the nature of our study environment where 10
participants worked in close proximity, we found that social in-
teraction was common during breaks, and sometimes, they had
synchronized breaks (e.g., chatting with others and meeting
with mentors leveraging moving breaks). For those who took
shorter breaks, they tended to overestimate the break duration
without much thinking: “It seems 5 minutes is a long time to
grab a drink. It’s interesting, I didn’t notice that” (P3), and
would not wait until the end of the break: “When I came back,
if it says I get 5 more minutes, I’ll just start to work” (P13).

RQ2: The Contexts Around Information Workers’ Break-

Taking Intentions & Practices
Participants had various reasons to take breaks or not. Here,
we describe participants’ motivations to take moving breaks,
and the reasons behind their responses to the break prompt.
In addition, we describe what participants learned about their
work and break habits from the study.

Motivations to Take Moving Breaks
In the pre-study questionnaire, we asked participants their
motivation to take breaks during work hours. From their
responses, we found they have the following different mo-
tivations: (1) lowering stress or being relaxed (32.1%), (2)
physiological needs (e.g., need to go to restroom or go for
lunch; 28.6%), (3) getting refreshed from work (23.2%), and

(4) staying healthy (12.5%). Two participants answered that
they did not have speciﬁc motivation to take moving breaks.

Responses to the Break Prompt
The log data showed that participants with stronger pre-study
habit strength in taking moving breaks were more likely to
respond “yes” to the break prompt (OR = 1.26, p < .001). How-
ever, the pre-study self-regulation in taking moving breaks did
not predict participants’ responses to the prompt (OR = .90,
p = .281). The log data also showed that although the work
duration did not predict participants’ responses to the prompt
(OR = .99, p = .903), for the days when participants had longer
work duration than usual, they responded “yes” more often at
the within-subjects level (OR = 1.30, p = .029).

During the post-study interview, we asked participants to recall
the common situations when they responded “yes” to the break
prompt. We noticed that with the break prompt, participants’
break-taking intentions were based on their current work and
mental status rather than their intrinsic motivation in taking
moving breaks. All the participants mentioned they responded
“yes” to the break prompt when they had physiological needs.
Other situations included when they just completed a task,
worked on an easy or difﬁcult task, had a ﬂexible schedule,
and felt tired. For example, P20 noted, “Probably only when I
had to go to the bathroom, grab coffee [or] lunch, or go to a
meeting. I rarely just get up and stretch.” Similarly, P4 noted
that he usually took a moving break when he wanted to go to
restroom, smoke, or get a coffee.

Among the 542 “no” responses, 525 entries (96.9%) provided
valid reasons for declining to take a moving break. The most
prevalent reasons for declining to take a break were: busy
working (40.6%), in a meeting or class (18.9%), and just com-
ing back from a break (15.2%). Table 1 shows the reasons
along with example quotes from the participants. We noticed
that many participants entered “just coming back from a break”
as the reason for not taking a break, because they could oc-
casionally leave their desk without locking their machines,
which could not be captured by Time for Break.

Increased Self-Awareness
Even though Time for Break did not provide participants with
any feedback besides how long they had been sitting, partici-
pants became aware of their work and break routines during
the study through receiving prompts and responding to them.

While talking about the experience with Time for Break, eight
participants stated that they were not aware of how long they
had been sitting until the break prompt popped up: “every
once in a while, it was kind of a surprise like oh, that much
time has passed” (P9), “I’m surprised that that much time
elapsed already” (P20). In addition, through receiving the
break prompt with a certain frequency, participants were aware
of their sedentary level. Some participants realized that they
spent too much time on sitting: “I learned that I don’t get up
enough. I need to do better, standing up and walking away”
(P10). While others realized that they were less sedentary than
they had thought: “I didn’t notice until the study. I didn’t
notice I got up so frequently. For 120 minutes, I was not
sedentary at all. But for 60 minutes, maybe I am” (P2).

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 127Page 7Reasons
busy working

in a meeting or class

coming back from a break
close to ﬁnish something

Percentage
40.6%

18.9%

15.2%
8.8%

heading to other place (e.g., home)
soon
engaged in a conversation
engaged in a screen-based activity
(e.g., video, game)
having lunch or dinner

7.9%

3.7%
2.5%

2.4%

Example Quotes
“It [Time for Break] prompted me to take a break, which I didn’t want to. Because
I was focused on something and I want to keep doing it.” (P4)
“They were sometimes in a video conference I was sharing my screen and it pop
up. I had to say no.” (P14)
“I just came back to my desk from lunch, it popped up and I had to click no.” (P5)
“Some of the times I would be prompted to take a break but I was like almost done
with something, that would take me like ﬁve more minutes, so I would like not to
take my break when I was prompted.” (P1)
“Especially towards the end of the day, I’m going home anyway... I know that 30
minutes tacked on to me being able to go home.” (P11)
“I was in the middle of a phone call. Sometimes it’s kind of hard to say ’yes’.” (P6)
“sometimes [I was] working but then [I] switched to a game, and when it popped
up I would say no.” (P24)
“I was eating lunch at my desk. I would not take a break during lunch.” (P22)

Table 1. Reasons logged on Time for Break for not taking a break, and example quotes from the post-study interview.

Although we did not measure participants’ work productivity
or suggest them to improve on their work productivity, ﬁve par-
ticipants indicated that their productivity improved by taking
moving breaks with Time for Break. For example, P11 noted
that “You know it was good to get away from the desk, come
back and be [sic] refreshing, and my productivity improved.”
P6 mentioned that he became more productive by trying to
respond “yes” to the break prompt before it disappeared: “like
10 minutes before it’s coming up, I’d wrap up work and tried
to get it done faster, so I’d catch those breaks. Or maybe,
switch to some easy task like emailing ... If there is [an effect],
it must be increasing the productivity.” Other participants such
as P1 noted that Time for Break helped her keep a consistent
work and break schedule: “I was in a more thoughtful mind,
maintaining a certain schedule of working, it kind of enabled
me to implement a midday break, just breaking up 8 hours or
8 and a half hours of continuous working.”

Participants expressed the desire to receive feedback on their
responses to the prompt and break-taking behavior so that they
can better understand their work and break patterns and make
improvement accordingly: “so if there is like some feedback
for me to show my progress over time, [it] would help me
understand how well I’m actually doing, or maybe some graph
showing what I’m actually doing and what I thought I might
be doing” (P3), “something like check your progress or see
how you did surround everything” (P8).

Increased Accountability
Although we designed the break prompt in a neutral way, seven
participants mentioned that they felt accountable to respond
“yes” to the break prompt. For example, P8, who set her work
duration as 30 minutes every day, said: “it was annoying
sometimes, but I still felt that 30 minutes was the right amount
of time. So I felt that I had to comply with the annoyance
because that’s what it was meant to do.” Some participants
even felt guilty for responding ‘no’ to the break prompt, such
as P1: “maybe slightly guilty. I knew that I should be doing
this, I should not be saying “no” to it so often” and P10: “It’s
just made me feel bad. It’s like oh god, I should have got up
but I’m not taking care of myself.”

In addition, four participants tended to wait for the break
prompt even when they were ready to take a moving break: “I
would check it [the work duration counter] occasionally just to
see when my break is. Because I wanted to get a drink of water
or something and I would see when the window was going to
come up, and wait to take my break” (P21). Likewise, P14
liked to mouse over the work duration counter even though
she was ready for a break: “to check how soon my next break
would be, I wait like usually 10 or 15 minutes [for the prompt],
and then I went to the restroom.”

RQ3:

Relationships Between Habit Strength, Self-

Regulation, Break-Taking Intentions & Practices
We found that participants’ pre-study habit strength and self-
regulation played different but important roles in their break-
taking intentions & practices. Moreover, their break-taking
intentions & practices affected their post-study habit strength
and self-regulation differently. In this section, we ﬁrst de-
scribe the results on participants’ response latency to the break
prompt, and then report the ﬁndings around participants’ habit
strength and self-regulation.

Response Latency
The log data showed that (1) participants who set longer work
duration on average responded slower than those who set
shorter work duration (b = 4.82, p = .013); (2) participants
responded to the break prompt faster as the study progressed (b
= -.74, p = .013); (3) more than half of the responses (50.6%)
occurred within the ﬁrst 20 seconds upon receiving the prompt;
and (4) there is no signiﬁcant correlation between response
latency and responses of “yes” or “no” (OR = 1.00, p = .598).

During the interview, participants stated that if they were
certain whether to take a break or not, they would respond
very quickly: “When I responded ‘no,’ I knew for a fact that I
couldn’t leave my desk ... So I didn’t even give it much thought
to click the ‘no’ button” (P2). However, when they wanted to
take a break but were not ready for it, they tried to catch up
the prompt within 2 minutes before it disappeared. Thus, it
took them longer to respond to the break prompt: “a couple
times I would wait like another minute before I would click on
the ‘yes.’ So I could ﬁnish the work and then click it” (P9).

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 127Page 8Habit Strength and Self-Regulation
The log data showed that participants’ habit strength and self-
regulation both increased from pre-study to post-study, but the
increase was signiﬁcant only for pre/post self-regulation (M
= 4.26, SD = 0.60; M = 3.75, SD = 0.77), t(24) = -3.64, p =
.010, d = .728. Although self-regulation did not predict par-
ticipants’ responses to the prompt, participants with stronger
self-regulation responded faster to the break prompt (b = -6.96,
p < .001). In addition, we found that participants who set con-
sistent intended break duration increased their habit strength
more than participants who set variable intended break dura-
tion (b = -1.34, p = .04).

DISCUSSION
Our goal was to inform the design of systems for promoting
long-term healthy work routines. In designing such systems,
we should consider both health and productivity as two impor-
tant design values and devise ways to support both without
signiﬁcantly compromising one over the other. In the fol-
lowing, we describe the lessons learned and implications for
designing effective systems that aim to help people break pro-
longed sedentary behavior while maintaining productivity. We
also discuss the limitations of the study and future work.

Consider Long-term Health as an Important Design Value
Our study results showed that people’s motivations to take
moving breaks are not well aligned with why they actually take
moving breaks. Even though many participants recognized
the importance of taking moving breaks for reasons such as
lowering stress, being relaxed, getting refreshed from work,
and staying healthy, their actual breaks were mainly driven
from physiological needs. This ﬁnding is consistent with
previous research, which found that people are inclined to
make efforts to satisfy their physiological needs rather than
psychological needs [20]. Therefore, future systems should
link the long-term beneﬁts of breaking prolonged sedentary
behavior to taking regular moving breaks.

Similarly, prior works on interruptibility tend to optimize peo-
ple’s near-term work productivity; for example, if people are
continuously debugging for several hours without a break, this
would not be considered as a good time to interrupt. However,
from the perspective of breaking the sedentary behavior to
account for workers’ long-term health, they should have taken
a moving break once the working hours have passed a certain
threshold. To design systems for promoting healthy work rou-
tines, factors affecting workers’ long-term health should be
treated as equally important as their productivity goals.

Support Creating Work & Break Rhythm
Our results showed that participants with stronger pre-study
habit strength in taking moving breaks responded “yes” to the
prompt more often than those with weaker pre-study habit
strength. This ﬁnding reﬂects that it was easy for partici-
pants to act in line with existing habits but was more difﬁ-
cult to start a new habit (i.e., change behavior solely rely on
self-regulation). Participants’ self-regulation signiﬁcantly in-
creased over the study period, which means that they became
better at developing and managing their plan to take moving
breaks. We suspect that the result is partly due to (1) self-
set work & break duration and (2) prompts’ cyclical nature.

Entering data and receiving prompts could have enhanced
awareness, and the periodical prompts could have helped par-
ticipants keep a consistent work & break schedule and develop
self-accountability, regulating behaviors.

On the other hand, we found no signiﬁcant difference in
pre/post habit strength, which indicates that simple prompt-
based systems might not be enough to promote automaticity
in the target behavior. However, participants who set consis-
tent intended break duration showed a higher increase in their
post-study habit strength than those who set variable intended
break duration. This result corresponds to the prior work that
suggested promoting habit strength through regular routines
[61]. As participants’ intended break duration varied a lot
at the within-subjects level, we suspect that this overall in-
consistent intended break duration is one of the reasons why
their post-study habit strength did not signiﬁcantly increase:
frequently changing the intended break duration might have
disrupted formation of regular routines.

Moreover, many participants tended to take longer breaks than
they intended. This might be due to the unique work settings
of our study participants, where most participants were easy
to be caught by their co-workers during the break and start
chatting. Participants did not necessarily try to follow the
break duration because keeping track of how long a break
has passed required extra effort, especially when they were
socializing. Moreover, some participants did not think it is
important to stick to the intended break duration while others
felt awkward and impolite to suddenly stop talking and go
back to work just because their break duration was over.

Prior work [16, 44] showed that habit strength plays an impor-
tant role in promoting healthy behavior, including breaking
prolonged sedentary behavior. To increase habit strength, an
effective way is to support people to routinely perform the
target behavior [61]. We suggest that future systems support
routine formation by nudging people not only to set a more
consistent intended work and break duration but also to abide
by the intended break duration. We could use smart phone or
wearable devices, designing a multimodal prompting mech-
anism to remind people of going back to work. In this way,
people can regulate their actual break duration to align with
their intended break duration and maintain their regular work
schedule. Besides, for those who usually get caught by some-
one during the break, the “work prompt” can be an excuse of
absence and avoid social friction.

Promote Moving Breaks in Workplaces
As workplace is a social environment, participants occasion-
ally had moving breaks together during which they discussed
work-related matters, had coffee or lunch together, or just ran
into each other and started chatting. We envision a new op-
portunity to promote synchronized breaks among coworkers,
during which they stand up and move together. Taking break
together could also help enhance the communication among
employees, and thus improve organization productivity [67].

In addition, there are meetings that can be done while walking
or standing up, such as regular one-on-one meetings between

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 127Page 9a mentor and mentee, or small-group meetings that do not
require whiteboards, computers, or projector. Drawn from the
common social interaction during moving breaks, we suggest
a break prompting system that encourages people to schedule
a “walking meeting” rather than “sitting meeting” by recom-
mending a walking path considering the time and weather.

tems that facilitate visual data exploration could enable more
mindful reﬂections and help gain rich insights [15]. Lastly, to
identify appropriate prompting moments, we can build intelli-
gent systems that take the contextual information into consid-
eration through connecting with people’s calendar, to-do-list,
phone status, or application usage.

Meetings commonly last for 30 minutes or for an hour; we
suspect this is due to people’s preconceived notion of meeting
duration, and the default settings of calendar systems. In a
similar vein, our study showed that people’s commonly set 60-
minute work duration. This leaves not enough room for taking
moving breaks between meetings especially when another
meeting or event is scheduled right after a meeting. Given that
between meetings can be a good time to take moving breaks,
a possible way to promote moving breaks is to have 25 or 55
minutes as a default meeting duration in a calendar system.

Limitations and Future Work
We need to be cautious in generalizing our ﬁndings due to
the following limitations of this work. First, despite our ef-
forts to minimize nudging on behavior change, Time for Break
have changed participants’ break-taking intention and behav-
ior and their self-awareness. For example, participants could
have taken more breaks than usual, and could have been more
mindful about their break duration. Second, we did not cap-
ture participants’ actual moving breaks and work practices.
Instead, we relied on machines’ status, which could have af-
fected our data accuracy (e.g., participants could have left
their desk without locking their machine). Third, the pool of
participants was limited to university staff members and grad-
uate students, and thus, their nature of the work—attending
meetings, classes, and events in different locations away from
their computer—might be different from that of other types of
information workers. Finally, we did not measure participants’
work productivity. Although participants reported an increase
in their work productivity during the post-study interview,
their perception could have been inaccurate.

This work was an exploratory study to understand rich contexts
affecting participants’ receptiveness to standing or moving
breaks with an aim to design an intervention to break seden-
tary behavior. Going forward, we suggest four opportunities
to extend Time for Break into an effective intervention sys-
tem. First, to accurately measure work & break duration, we
can leverage wearable sensors (e.g., accelerometer, GPS) and
embedded sensors (e.g., web-cam) combined with machine’s
status to capture actual work and break duration at a more
granular level. Additional way to improve data accuracy is to
enable people to edit the automatically collected data using the
semi-automated approach [14]. Second, we can incorporate
Time for Break with existing systems designed to measure
and improve productivity (e.g., RescueTime [22], TimeAware
[42]). Third, our results suggest important implications for
feedback design. Incorporating descriptive feedback such as
total work & break time and work productivity level, while
highlighting people’s work and break routines, outliers (e.g.,
out of routines and irregularities), and the adherence to the
intended break & work duration could motivate people to take
more consistent moving breaks. Furthermore, interactive sys-

CONCLUSION
We conducted an exploratory study with Time for Break, a
desktop-based prompting system built to collect information
workers’ work & break intentions and behaviors, and the con-
texts around them. From the three weeks of data collection
with Time for Break, pre- & post-study questionnaire, and
post-study interviews, we distilled rich contexts affecting par-
ticipants’ receptiveness to standing or moving breaks, and
identiﬁed how their habit strength and self-regulation are re-
lated to their break-taking intentions & practices. This work
opens up a new research avenue going beyond existing works
on productivity and interruptibility. We presented many re-
search opportunities to promote healthy workplace environ-
ment. Speciﬁcally, we discussed the importance of “long-term
health” as an important design value, needs to promote moving
breaks in workplaces, and ways to help information workers
form healthy and consistent work & break rhythm. We also
identiﬁed several ways to extend Time for Break to be an
effective and sustainable intervention to help people break
prolonged sedentary behavior in workplaces.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank all the study participants for their
time and effort. We also thank Sravya Valiveti for assisting
in data analyses, and Chiyoung Oh, Daniel Smolyak, and
Catherine Plaisant for their helpful comments and feedback.
In addition, we thank the reviewers for their thoughtful and
detailed reviews.

REFERENCES

1. Taleb A Alkhajah, Marina M Reeves, Elizabeth G Eakin,
Elisabeth AH Winkler, Neville Owen, and Genevieve N
Healy. 2012. Sit–stand workstations: a pilot intervention
to reduce ofﬁce sitting time. American Journal of
Preventive Medicine 43, 3 (2012), 298–303.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2012.05.027

2. Ernesto Arroyo and Ted Selker. 2011. Attention and

intention goals can mediate disruption in
human-computer interaction. In Proceedings of the 13th
IFIP TC 13 International Conference on
Human-Computer Interaction - Volume Part II.
Springer-Verlag, 454–470.
http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-23771-3_34

3. Andrea Bankoski, Tamara B Harris, James J McClain,

Robert J Brychta, Paolo Caserotti, Kong Y Chen, David
Berrigan, Richard P Troiano, and Annemarie Koster.
2011. Sedentary activity associated with metabolic
syndrome independent of physical activity. Diabetes Care
34, 2 (2011), 497–503. http://doi.org/10.2337/dc10-0987

4. Joel Barnes, Timothy K Behrens, Mark E Benden, Stuart
Biddle, Dale Bond, Patrice Brassard, Helen Brown,

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 127Page 10Lucas Carr, Jean-Philippe Chaput, Hayley Christian, and
others. 2012. Letter to the editor: standardized use of the
terms “sedentary” and “sedentary behaviours”. Applied
Physiology Nutrition and Metabolism-Physiologie
Appliquee Nutrition Et Metabolisme 37, 3 (2012),
540–542. http://doi.org/10.1139/h2012-024

5. Douglas M Bates. 2010. lme4: Mixed-effects modeling

with R. (2010).

6. Stuart JH Biddle. 2007. Sedentary behavior. American
Journal of Preventive Medicine 33, 6 (2007), 502–504.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2007.08.002

7. Aviroop Biswas, Paul I Oh, Guy E Faulkner, Ravi R

Bajaj, Michael A Silver, Marc S Mitchell, and David A
Alter. 2015. Sedentary time and its association with risk
for disease incidence, mortality, and hospitalization in
adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Annals of
Internal Medicine 162, 2 (2015), 123–132.
http://doi.org/10.7326/M14-1651

8. Dale S Bond, J Graham Thomas, Hollie A Raynor, Jon
Moon, Jared Sieling, Jennifer Trautvetter, Tiffany
Leblond, and Rena R Wing. 2014. B-MOBILE - a
smartphone-based intervention to reduce sedentary time
in overweight/obese individuals: a within-subjects
experimental trial. PloS One 9, 6 (2014), e100821.
http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0100821

9. George EP Box and David R Cox. 1964. An analysis of
transformations. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society.
Series B (Methodological) (1964), 211–252.

10. Janice M Brown, William R Miller, and Lauren A

Lawendowski. 1999. The self-regulation questionnaire.
(1999).

11. Jude Buckley, Jason D Cohen, Arthur F Kramer, Edward
McAuley, and Sean P Mullen. 2014. Cognitive control in
the self-regulation of physical activity and sedentary
behavior. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 8 (2014).
http://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00747

12. Scott A Cambo, Daniel Avrahami, and Matthew L Lee.

2017. BreakSense: combining physiological and location
sensing to promote mobility during work-breaks. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’17). ACM,
3595–3607. http://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3026021

13. Josephine Y Chau, Michelle Daley, Scott Dunn, Anu
Srinivasan, Anna Do, Adrian E Bauman, and Hidde P
van der Ploeg. 2014. The effectiveness of sit-stand
workstations for changing ofﬁce workers’ sitting time:
results from the Stand@Work randomized controlled trial
pilot. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and
Physical Activity 11, 1 (2014), 127.
http://doi.org/10.1186/s12966-014-0127-7

14. Eun Kyoung Choe, Saeed Abdullah, Mashﬁqui Rabbi,
Edison Thomaz, Daniel A Epstein, Felicia Cordeiro,
Matthew Kay, Gregory D Abowd, Tanzeem Choudhury,
James Fogarty, Bongshin Lee, Mark Matthews, and
Julie A Kientz. 2017a. Semi-automated tracking: a

balanced approach for self-monitoring applications. IEEE
Pervasive Computing 16, 1 (2017), 74–84.
http://doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2017.18

15. Eun Kyoung Choe, Bongshin Lee, Haining Zhu,

Nathalie Henry Riche, and Dominikus Baur. 2017b.
Understanding self-reﬂection: how people reﬂect on
personal data through visual data exploration. In
Proceedings of the 11th EAI International Conference on
Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare
(PervasiveHealth ’17).

16. David E Conroy, Jaclyn P Maher, Steriani Elavsky,
Amanda L Hyde, and Shawna E Doerksen. 2013.
Sedentary behavior as a daily process regulated by habits
and intentions. Health Psychology 32, 11 (2013), 1149.
http://doi.org/10.1037/a0031629

17. Sunny Consolvo and Miriam Walker. 2003. Using the
experience sampling method to evaluate ubicomp
applications. IEEE Pervasive Computing 2, 2 (2003),
24–31. http://doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2003.1203750

18. Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi and Reed Larson. 2014.
Validity and reliability of the experience-sampling
method. In Flow and the Foundations of Positive
Psychology. Springer, 35–54.
http://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-017-9088-8_3

19. Mary Czerwinski, Ran Gilad-Bachrach, Shamsi Iqbal,
and Gloria Mark. 2016. Challenges for designing
notiﬁcations for affective computing systems. In
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Joint
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing:
Adjunct. ACM, 1554–1559.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2968219.2968548

20. Edward L Deci and Richard M Ryan. 2000. The “what”
and “why” of goal pursuits: human needs and the
self-determination of behavior. Psychological Inquiry 11,
4 (2000), 227–268.
http://doi.org/10.1207/S15327965PLI1104_01

21. PACO Developers. 2010. PACO.

https://www.pacoapp.com/. (2010). Accessed:
2018-01-05.

22. RescueTime Developers. 2008. RescueTime.

https://www.rescuetime.com. (2008). Accessed:
2018-01-05.

23. DW Dunstan, Jo Salmon, Neville Owen, T Armstrong,
PZ Zimmet, TA Welborn, AJ Cameron, T Dwyer, D
Jolley, and JE Shaw. 2005. Associations of TV viewing
and physical activity with the metabolic syndrome in
Australian adults. Diabetologia 48, 11 (2005),
2254–2261. http://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-005-1963-4

24. Daniel A Epstein, Daniel Avrahami, and Jacob T Biehl.

2016. Taking 5: work-breaks, productivity, and
opportunities for personal informatics for knowledge
workers. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16). ACM,
673–684. http://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858066

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 127Page 1125. Brian J Fogg. 2009. A behavior model for persuasive
design. In Proceedings of the 4th international
Conference on Persuasive Technology. ACM, 40.
http://doi.org/10.1145/1541948.1541999

26. Clive J Fullagar and E Kevin Kelloway. 2009. Flow at
work: an experience sampling approach. Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology 82, 3
(2009), 595–615.
http://doi.org/10.1348/096317908X357903

27. Benjamin Gardner, Charles Abraham, Phillippa Lally,

and Gert-Jan de Bruijn. 2012. Towards parsimony in
habit measurement: testing the convergent and predictive
validity of an automaticity subscale of the self-report
habit index. International Journal of Behavioral
Nutrition and Physical Activity 9, 1 (2012), 102.
http://doi.org/10.1186/1479-5868-9-102

35. Shamsi T Iqbal and Brian P Bailey. 2005. Investigating

the effectiveness of mental workload as a predictor of
opportune moments for interruption. In CHI’05 Extended
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 1489–1492.
http://doi.org/10.1145/1056808.1056948

36. Shamsi T Iqbal and Brian P Bailey. 2008. Effects of

intelligent notiﬁcation management on users and their
tasks. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’08). ACM,
93–102. http://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357070

37. Quintus R Jett and Jennifer M George. 2003. Work

interrupted: a closer look at the role of interruptions in
organizational life. Academy of Management Review 28,
3 (2003), 494–507.
http://doi.org/10.5465/AMR.2003.10196791

28. Nicholas D Gilson, Alessandro Suppini, Gemma C Ryde,
Helen E Brown, and Wendy J Brown. 2012. Does the use
of standing “hot” desks change sedentary work time in an
open plan ofﬁce? Preventive Medicine 54, 1 (2012),
65–67. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2011.10.012

38. Jing Jin and Laura A Dabbish. 2009. Self-interruption on

the computer: a typology of discretionary task
interleaving. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’09). ACM,
1799–1808. http://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518979

29. Anders Grøntved and Frank B Hu. 2011. Television
viewing and risk of type 2 diabetes, cardiovascular
disease, and all-cause mortality: a meta-analysis. JAMA
305, 23 (2011), 2448–2455.
https://doi.org/10.1001/jama.2011.812

30. Genevieve N Healy, David W Dunstan, Jonathan E Shaw,
Paul Z Zimmet, and Neville Owen. 2006. Beneﬁcial
associations of physical activity with 2-h but not fasting
blood glucose in Australian adults. Diabetes Care 29, 12
(2006), 2598–2604. http://doi.org/10.2337/dc06-0313

31. Joel M Hektner, Jennifer A Schmidt, and Mihaly

Csikszentmihalyi. 2007. Experience sampling method:
Measuring the quality of everyday life. Sage.

32. Frank B Hu, Tricia Y Li, Graham A Colditz, Walter C

Willett, and JoAnn E Manson. 2003. Television watching
and other sedentary behaviors in relation to risk of
obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus in women. Jama 289,
14 (2003), 1785–1791.
http://doi.org/10.1001/jama.289.14.1785

33. Scott Hudson, James Fogarty, Christopher Atkeson,

Daniel Avrahami, Jodi Forlizzi, Sara Kiesler, Johnny Lee,
and Jie Yang. 2003. Predicting human interruptibility
with sensors: A wizard of oz feasibility study. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’03). ACM, 257–264.
http://doi.org/10.1145/642611.642657

34. Stephen Intille, Caitlin Haynes, Dharam Maniar, Aditya

Ponnada, and Justin Manjourides. 2016. µEMA:
Microinteraction-based ecological momentary
assessment (EMA) using a smartwatch. In Proceedings of
the 2016 ACM International Joint Conference on
Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing. ACM, 1124–1128.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2971648.2971717

39. Dinesh John, Dixie L Thompson, Hollie Raynor, Kenneth
Bielak, Bob Rider, and David R Bassett. 2011. Treadmill
workstations: a worksite physical activity intervention in
overweight and obese ofﬁce workers. Journal of Physical
Activity and Health 8, 8 (2011), 1034–1043.
http://doi.org/10.1123/jpah.8.8.1034

40. Peter T Katzmarzyk, Timothy S Church, Cora L Craig,
and Claude Bouchard. 2009. Sitting time and mortality
from all causes, cardiovascular disease, and cancer.
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 41, 5 (2009),
998–1005.
https://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0b013e3181930355

41. Sarah K Keadle, David E Conroy, Matthew P Buman,
David W Dunstan, and Charles E Matthews. 2017.
Targeting reductions in sitting time to increase physical
activity and improve health. Medicine and Science in
Sports and Exercise (2017).
http://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0000000000001257

42. Young-Ho Kim, Jae Ho Jeon, Eun Kyoung Choe,

Bongshin Lee, KwonHyun Kim, and Jinwook Seo. 2016.
TimeAware: leveraging framing effects to enhance
personal productivity. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
(CHI ’16). ACM, 272–283.
http://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858428

43. Reed Larson and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi. 1983. The
experience sampling method. New Directions for
Methodology of Social & Behavioral Science (1983).

44. Jaclyn P Maher and David E Conroy. 2015. Habit

strength moderates the effects of daily action planning
prompts on physical activity but not sedentary behavior.
Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology 37, 1 (2015),
97–107. http://doi.org/10.1123/jsep.2014-0258

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 127Page 1245. Gloria Mark, Victor M Gonzalez, and Justin Harris. 2005.
No task left behind?: examining the nature of fragmented
work. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
Human factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’05). ACM,
321–330. http://doi.org/10.1145/1054972.1055017

46. Gloria Mark, Shamsi T Iqbal, Mary Czerwinski, and Paul
Johns. 2014. Bored mondays and focused afternoons: the
rhythm of attention and online activity in the workplace.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’14). ACM,
3025–3034. http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557204

47. Shelly K McCrady and James A Levine. 2009.

Sedentariness at work: how much do we really sit?
Obesity 17, 11 (2009), 2103–2105.
http://doi.org/10.1038/oby.2009.117

48. Matthew B Miles, A Michael Huberman, and J Saldana.
1984. Qualitative data analysis: a sourcebook. Beverly
Hills (1984).

49. Dan Morris, AJ Brush, and Brian R Meyers. 2008.

SuperBreak: using interactivity to enhance ergonomic
typing breaks. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’08).
ACM, 1817–1826.
http://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357337

50. U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2016. Employed persons
working and time spent working on days worked by full-
and part-time status and sex, jobholding status,
educational attainment, and day of week, 2016 annual
averages.
https://www.bls.gov/news.release/atus.t04.htm. (2016).
Accessed: 2018-01-05.

51. Neville Owen, Adrian Bauman, and Wendy Brown. 2009.
Too much sitting: a novel and important predictor of
chronic disease risk? British Journal of Sports Medicine
43, 2 (2009), 81–83.
http://doi.org/10.1136/bjsm.2008.055269

52. Neville Owen, Geneviève N Healy, Charles E Matthews,
and David W Dunstan. 2010. Too much sitting: the
population-health science of sedentary behavior. Exercise
and Sport Sciences Reviews 38, 3 (2010), 105.
http://doi.org/10.1097/JES.0b013e3181e373a2

53. Sharon Parry and Leon Straker. 2013. The contribution of
ofﬁce work to sedentary behaviour associated risk. BMC
Public Health 13, 1 (2013), 296.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12966-017-0525-8

54. Russell R Pate, Jennifer R O’neill, and Felipe Lobelo.
2008. The evolving deﬁnition of “sedentary”. Exercise
and Sport Sciences Reviews 36, 4 (2008), 173–178.
http://doi.org/10.1097/JES.0b013e3181877d1a

55. Christine A Pellegrini, Sara A Hoffman, Elyse R Daly,

56. Ian Renfree and Anna Cox. 2016. Tangibly Reducing
Sedentariness in Ofﬁce Workers. Association for
Computing Machinery (ACM).

57. Cormac G Ryan, Philippa M Dall, Malcolm H Granat,
and P Margaret Grant. 2011. Sitting patterns at work:
objective measurement of adherence to current
recommendations. Ergonomics 54, 6 (2011), 531–538.
http://doi.org/10.1080/00140139.2011.570458

58. Christie Napa Scollon, Chu-Kim Prieto, and Ed Diener.
2009. Experience sampling: promises and pitfalls,
strength and weaknesses. In Assessing Well-Being.
Springer, 157–180.
http://doi.org/10.1007/978-90-481-2354-4_8

59. Katie A Siek, Gillian R Hayes, Mark W Newman, and
John C Tang. 2014. Field deployments: knowing from
using in context. In Ways of Knowing in HCI. Springer,
119–142. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4939-0378-8_6

60. Richard Spinney, Lee Smith, Marcella Ucci, Abigail
Fisher, Marina Konstantatou, Alexia Sawyer, Jane
Wardle, and Alexi Marmot. 2015. Indoor tracking to
understand physical activity and sedentary behaviour:
Exploratory study in UK ofﬁce buildings. PloS One 10, 5
(2015), e0127688.
http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0127688

61. Katarzyna Stawarz, Anna L Cox, and Ann Blandford.
2015. Beyond self-tracking and reminders: designing
smartphone apps that support habit formation. In
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15). ACM,
2653–2662. http://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702230

62. Dejal System. 2017. Time Out.

http://www.dejal.com/timeout/. (2017). Accessed:
2018-01-05.

63. Sabrina Thai and Elizabeth Page-Gould. 2017.

Experiencesampler: an open-source scaffold for building
experience sampling smartphone apps. (2017).
http://doi.org/10.1037/met0000151

64. Mark S Tremblay, Salomé Aubert, Joel D Barnes,

Travis J Saunders, Valerie Carson, Amy E
Latimer-Cheung, Sebastien FM Chastin, Teatske M
Altenburg, and Mai JM Chinapaw. 2017. Sedentary
behavior research network (SBRN) - terminology
consensus project process and outcome. International
Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity 14,
1 (2017), 75. http://doi.org/10.1186/s12966-017-0525-8

65. Saskia Van Dantzig, Gijs Geleijnse, and Aart Tijmen van
Halteren. 2013. Toward a persuasive mobile application
to reduce sedentary behavior. Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing 17, 6 (2013), 1237–1246.
http://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-012-0588-0

Manuel Murillo, Gleb Iakovlev, and Bonnie Spring. 2015.
Acceptability of smartphone technology to interrupt
sedentary time in adults with diabetes. Translational
Behavioral Medicine 5, 3 (2015), 307–314.
http://doi.org/10.1007/s13142-015-0314-3

66. Bas Verplanken and Sheina Orbell. 2003. Reﬂections on
past behavior: a self-report index of habit strength.
Journal of Applied Social Psychology 33, 6 (2003),
1313–1330.
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-1816.2003.tb01951.x

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 127Page 1367. Benjamin N Waber, Daniel Olguin Olguin, Taemie Kim,
and Alex Pentland. 2010. Productivity through coffee
breaks: changing social networks by changing break
structure. (2010). http://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1586375

68. Emma G Wilmot, Charlotte L Edwardson, Felix A

Achana, Melanie J Davies, Trish Gorely, Laura J Gray,
Kamlesh Khunti, Thomas Yates, and Stuart JH Biddle.
2012. Sedentary time in adults and the association with
diabetes, cardiovascular disease and death: systematic
review and meta-analysis. (2012).
http://doi.org/10.1007/s00125-012-2677-z

69. Sheng Wu, Catherine M Crespi, and Weng Kee Wong.
2012. Comparison of methods for estimating the

intraclass correlation coefﬁcient for binary responses in
cancer prevention cluster randomized trials.
Contemporary Clinical Trials 33, 5 (2012), 869–880.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.cct.2012.05.004

70. Manuela Züger, Christopher Corley, André N Meyer,
Boyang Li, Thomas Fritz, David Shepherd, Vinay
Augustine, Patrick Francis, Nicholas Kraft, and Will
Snipes. 2017. Reducing interruptions at work: A
large-scale ﬁeld study of FlowLight. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’17). ACM, 61–72.
http://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025662

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 127Page 14