Trajectories of Engagement and Disengagement with a 
Story-Based Smoking Cessation App 
Wally Smith1, Bernd Ploderer2, Greg Wadley1, Sarah Webber1 and Ron Borland3 

 1School of Computing & Information 
  Systems, University of Melbourne,  
Australia 
  {wsmith, greg.wadley, s.webber} 

2Queensland University of 
Technology, Brisbane,  
Australia 
b.ploderer@qut.edu.au 

3Cancer Council Victoria, 
Melbourne, 
Australia 
Ron.Borland@cancervic.org.au 

@unimelb.edu.au  

ABSTRACT 
Strong  user  engagement  with  digital  technologies  for 
behaviour  change  is  often  taken  as  a  precursor  to  their 
longer-term efficacy. We critically examine this assumption 
through  a  qualitative  study  of  a  smoking  cessation  app, 
called  NewLeaf,  which  allows  quitters  to  swap  personal 
stories.  The  study  examined  what  influenced  people  to 
engage  or  disengage  with  NewLeaf,  and  how  the  app  was 
deployed in quit attempts during a  four week trial. Several 
properties  of  swapped  stories  were  reported  to  promote 
currency, 
engagement, 
contextualization  of  advice,  and  evoking  a  sense  of 
community.  But  while  the  resulting  engagement  was 
in  supporting  quitting,  other 
sometimes  productive 
trajectories 
involving 
observed 
counterproductive  engagement,  and  a  surprising  pattern  of 
productive  disengagement  especially  among  stronger 
quitters.  We  discuss  how 
this  analysis  of  different 
trajectories problematizes any simple interpretation of user 
engagement  as  an  early  indicator  of  success  for  behaviour 
change technologies. 

authenticity, 

use  were 

including: 

of 

Author Keywords 
smoking  cessation;  health  behavior  change;  engagement; 
qualitative research 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.3  Group  and  Organization  Interfaces:  Web-based 
interaction. 

INTRODUCTION 
Persuasive  technology  has  been  a  prominent  area  of  HCI 
research with more than 100 papers at CHI over the last 10 
years  focused  on  behaviour  change  in  health  and  other 
domains  [15].  While  the  key  idea  of  designing  for 
behaviour  change  has  been  popular,  the  original  notion  of 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2017, May 06-11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA  
© 2017 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-4655-9/17/05…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3026054 

persuasive technology [11] has been critiqued on a number 
of  fronts  [5].  One  is  its  prescriptive  stance  on  what 
behaviours  are  deemed  desirable,  often  with  a  lack  of 
consideration  for  personal  needs  and  desires  [2],  and  for 
individual  circumstances  [9].  There  has  been  debate  about 
whether 'one size fits all', or whether more sensitive design 
is needed for varying motivations of individuals at different 
stages of change [14]. 

also 

faces 

In  the  area  of  health  behaviour  change,  research  into  new 
technologies 
significant  methodological 
challenges [17,30]. It is typically beyond the scope of HCI 
research to measure final health outcomes for a population, 
or even for a sample of study participants. Reasons include, 
as  Klasnja  et  al.  [17]  have  cogently  argued,  that  the 
timeframe of health interventions can be several months or 
years, and that generalizable outcomes are best established 
through  randomized  control  trials  (RCT)  as  favoured  by 
medical  research.  Although  possible 
in  principle,  a 
longitudinal RCT can lead to a different research focus that 
takes emphasis away from  HCI design. Instead, Klasnja et 
al.  argue  in  favour  of  HCI  researchers  using  intermediate 
indicators of success. 

To contribute to the understanding of this burgeoning class 
of  digital  technology,  our  aim  here  is  not  to  measure  the 
effectiveness  of  a  particular  technology  or  technique,  but 
rather  to  provide  a  qualitative  account  of  How  and  why 
people  engage  with  digital  tools  in  their  attempt  to 
than  seeking  a 
undertake  behaviour  change.  Rather 
normative  account,  we  are  concerned  with  the  variety  and 
even  idiosyncrasies  of  users  and  uses.  Implicit  in  much 
health app design, and related HCI research (including that 
of  the  authors),  is  what  can  be  called  the  engagement-
efficacy perspective: the belief that greater engagement with 
a  health  technology  is  a  precursor  to  its  longer-term 
efficacy in addressing the targeted health condition. Taking 
this  perspective  does  not  assume  that  engagement  is 
sufficient  to  achieve  efficacy,  nor  even  that  it  is  a  causal 
antecedent, but simply that greater engagement is a positive 
early indicator, in the sense described by Klasnja et al [17], 
and therefore a good outcome for HCI design. 

researchers 

Some 
the 
engagement-efficacy  perspective,  identifying  cases  where 
people disengage from a technology as part of the positive 

counter-findings 

report 

to 

Enabling Healthy BehaviorsCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA3045 
 
 
 
continuation  of  their  behaviour  change,  including  the 
'gateway  effect'  [29],  'happy  abandonment'  [7]'  for  various 
reasons  [10].  We  aim  to  build  on  these  accounts  and  to 
further  critically  examine  the  nature  and  significance  of 
engagement with behaviour change applications. 

The study we report here focuses on smoking cessation. We 
designed  a  mobile  app,  called  NewLeaf,  and  evaluated  it 
with  23  people  who  were  attempting  to  quit  smoking. 
Despite  many  developments  in  recent  decades  to  restrict 
and  curtail  the  smoking  of  cigarettes  in  several  countries, 
almost 6 million people are estimated to die each year from 
smoking-related  disease  worldwide,  with  forecasts  of  8 
million  deaths  per  year  by  2030  [35].  Smoking  cessation 
has  therefore  been  one  of  the  targets  of  HCI  researchers 
interested in persuasive technology [21, 23, 24, 26].  

Underlying  our  study  is  a  shift  away  from  the  persuasive 
technology  paradigm  which  puts  emphasis  on  whether  a 
tool can 'persuade' people to change. Instead, our premise is 
that digital tools are better seen as resources. Whether users 
of NewLeaf would successfully embark on a quit attempt is 
the  result  of  many  external  factors  relating  to  personal 
motivation  and  circumstances.  Our  concern  is  not  whether 
NewLeaf acts as the driver of success, but rather with how 
people  might  engage  with  its  suite  of  resources,  and  how 
they  might  deploy  them  positively,  or  otherwise,  in  their 
quit attempts. And within this, we ask whether engagement 
with  the  app  is  associated  with  positive  experiences  of 
attempting to quit. 

NewLeaf  was  designed  with 
three  potential  quitting 
resources.  Chief  among  these  was  an  online  forum  for 
people  to  exchange  their  personal  stories  of  attempting  to 
quit, widely believed to be a powerful and engaging health 
resource  [18].  For  comparison,  NewLeaf  also  provided 
expert  health  tips,  and  online  distractions  to  combat 
cravings.  The  app  thereby  provided  multiple  options  for 
engagement, thus serving the aims of our study. 

BACKGROUND & RELATED LITERATURE 

is 

the  much  broader 

Engagement and behaviour change technology 
Engagement  is  a  vital  but  notoriously  hard  to  define 
concept in HCI. For Sutcliffe, it is what makes a technology 
'attractive' and 'fun' to use [32], while for O'Brien and Toms 
it 
'quality  of  user  experience 
characterized  by  attributes  of  challenge,  positive  affect, 
endurability,  aesthetic  and  sensory  appeal,  attention, 
feedback,  variety/novelty,  interactivity,  and  perceived  user 
control.'  [20].  Turner  has  emphasised  the  centrality  of  the 
'affective'  dimension  of  engagement  'consistent  with  both 
our contingent identities and our wider purposes' [33] 

Although  our  study  was  designed  to  examine  the  affective 
experiences  of  users  of  NewLeaf,  we  use  the  term 
'engagement' here to mean the degree to which people use a 
digital aid in a way that relates to the purpose of behaviour 
change. Thus engagement refers to the extent and manner in 
which  people  actively  used  the  resources  of  NewLeaf  to 

them  quit 

help 
term 
'disengagement'  is  used  to  mean  withdrawing  from  active 
use of the tool. 

smoking.  Conversely, 

the 

In the case of smoking cessation, much research shows that 
smokers  are  highly  reluctant  to  engage  with  online  social 
support  tools  because  of  concerns  about  self-presentation, 
and embarrassment of failure [19]. It is not surprising, then, 
that  designers  and  researchers  set  user  engagement  as  a 
desirable goal. Hence, the engagement-efficacy perspective 
is implicit in much research and development. 

As an illustration, studies in this area are often premised on 
the  reasonable  assumption  of  making  apps,  or  other 
technologies,  more  engaging  to  increase  the  likelihood  of 
behaviour change down the track.  For example, Paay et al 
[21],  through  a  design  workshop  with  smokers,  report  that 
they desire advice that is personalized  for their  needs, that 
they  can  relate  to  and  which  is  tailored  to  their  stage  of 
quitting (e.g., intending  to quit, or currently  making a quit 
attempt).  Similarly,  Agapie  et  al  [1]  designed  a  system  to 
help  people  create  behaviour  change  plans  with  strangers 
and friends.  Interviews showed that participants responded 
to  plans  more  positively  when  they  were  tailored  to  their 
goals,  routines  and  preferences.  Reno  and  Poole  [26] 
examined  whether  and  how  people  would  respond  to  a 
request for social support to quit smoking on Facebook, and 
found that people are 10 times more likely to offer support 
to friends and family members compared to strangers.  

Disengagement and behaviour change technology 
However, there is also a growing  number of counterpoints 
to the engagement-efficacy perspective. Rooksby et al. [27] 
used an interview study to uncover a variety of motivations 
for  engaging  with  personal  health  apps  and  devices. 
Alongside  productive  uses,  were  non-productive  forms  of 
engagement,  e.g.,  a  desire  to  document  one’s  lifestyle, 
collect  rewards,  or  simply  a  fetish  for  gadgets  and 
technology.  A  recurring  finding  of  studies  of  wearable 
health  and  activity  monitors  is  that  they  are  typically 
abandoned  after  a  few  months  because  motivation  drops, 
needs  are not  met, or  because  people change to a different 
system [7,12]. Schwanda et al. [29] have termed this latter 
outcome  the  ‘gateway  effect’,  showing  that  persuasive 
technology can work as a conduit to new activities, and thus 
reduced  engagement  with  a  tool  is  not  always  a  sign  of 
failure.  

In the context of personal energy  use,  He  et al. [14] argue 
that  the  design  of  new  technologies  aiming  to  support 
behaviour change should consider differences among users. 
In particular, they draw on the transtheoretical model [25], 
to  argue  that  technologies  should  engage  adaptively  to 
people  at  different  stages  of  behaviour  change,  from  pre-
contemplation,  contemplation,  preparation,  action  and 
finally maintenance of the change. He et al. conclude that 'if 
technologies are adaptive, a dynamic component should be 
present  (e.g.,  social  networks),  as  technologies  cannot  be 
expected to keep up with complex human motivations'.  

Enabling Healthy BehaviorsCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA3046The value of personal narratives in behaviour change 
An important element of our study  was the use of personal 
stories  as  a  powerful  form  of  content  to  engage  users  in 
behaviour  change  [13].  By  focusing  specifically  on  how 
personal stories might engage quitters, we are drawing on a 
long history of research into the benefits of health advice in 
narrative  form  [22].  For  example,  Mamykina  et  al.  [18] 
designed a story-based mobile health application for people 
with  diabetes,  and  demonstrated  its  value  for  users  to 
maintain a positive self-image, to reassert their competence 
and to maintain continuity in their self-image over time. 

More  generally,  many  researchers  report  that  role  models 
and  norms  conveyed  through  narratives  can  influence 
behaviour  change  [16].  Borland  [3]  argues  that  habitual 
behaviours  like  smoking  can  be  effectively  influenced 
through  stories,  because  they  influence  our  actions  on  an 
unconscious level. However, there is also a line of evidence 
that shared stories may work to protect people's connection 
to  social  situations  in  which  the  adverse  behaviour  is 
prevalent, as in DeSantis’ [8] account of cigar smokers. 

STUDY METHOD 

The NewLeaf smoking cessation app 
To  explore  our  questions,  we  designed  and  built  a 
smartphone  app,  called  NewLeaf  (see  Figure  1),  which 
allows smokers to share personal quit stories. Unlike many 
of  the  studies  reviewed  above,  which  used  interviews, 
design workshops, and hypothetical responses, our aim was 
to study the role of NewLeaf in  real-life quit attempts that 
took place over the first four weeks following a decision to 
quit. 

Ploderer et al. [24] studied a quit app that presented expert 
tips about quitting and distractions to cope with cravings for 
cigarettes.  We  included  these  two  kinds  of  content  in 
NewLeaf to serve as comparisons with the personal stories. 
Most  prior  work  on  the  power  of  narratives  for  health 
behaviour change has focused on the use of professionally-
authored content [16]. In contrast, we were interested in the 
kinds  of  engagement  achieved  by  community-generated 
stories written and shared by smokers and quitters.  

To  ensure  that  we  had  a  thriving  community  from  the 
outset,  we  drew  content  from  the  forum  'StopSmoking' 
hosted on the Reddit website. This forum receives about 30 
posts a day from smokers and ex-smokers and is moderated 
by  long-term  quitters.  Reddit  has  a  publicly  available  API 
that  makes  it  possible  to  pass  content  to  and  from  the 
Reddit  server.  StopSmoking  is  pseudonymous  and  authors 
are not required to identify themselves. It is known that the 
anonymity of Reddit contributes to increased self-disclosure 
in online discussions about  sensitive issues  such as  mental 
health problems [6]. 

some  stories remained visible for longer.  For consistency, 
both expert tips and distractions were presented in the same 
way  as  stories,  with  comment  trails  following  each  item. 
The  expert  tips  were  sourced  from  counsellors  at  Quit 
Victoria,  a  smoking  cessation  agency  at  which  one  of  the 
authors  is  based.  To  source  distractions,  we  allowed  users 
to choose a  Reddit forum of  non-smoking content relevant 
to  their  interests;  examples  chosen  included  jokes,  world 
news, science, contemporary art. 

Figure 1. Screen-shot from the NewLeaf app showing a listing 
of stories, and buttons along the bottom to reach expert tips, 
distractions and home 

Participants and the study procedure 
Thirty  participants  were  recruited  into  the  study  via  an 
advertisement. Seven did not return for a second interview, 
leaving  23  participants  aged  between  23-50,  split  11/12 
between  males  and  females.  They  were  recruited  on  the 
basis  of  two  criteria:  being  adult  smokers  who  were 
considering a quit attempt, and being smartphone users.  

A first interview was held with each participant to find out 
their  smoking  history  and  quit  intentions,  and  to  introduce 
the  app  and  configure  the  distractions  page  to  a  forum  of 
their  choice.  Participants  were  then  left  to  use  the  app  as 
they  wished  over  the  following  four  weeks.  A  second  in-
depth  interview  was  held  towards  the  end  of  the  fourth 
week  to  probe  experiences  of  quitting  and  the  nature  of 
tips  and  distractions. 
engagement  with 
Participants  were  compensated  $25  per  interview  for  their 
time  and  travel  costs.  We  took  strong  steps  to  reduce  the 
potential  bias  of  participants  believing  they  needed  to  be 
positive about the app. They were encouraged to be critical, 
and emphasis was placed on comparing their experience of 
stories, tips and distractions. 

the  stories, 

Our  NewLeaf  app  presented  quitter  stories  from  the 
StopSmoking  forum  and  allowed  users  to  read  and  post 
content.  We  removed  many  of  the  features  of  the  full 
Reddit site, and reduced the rapid turnover of posts so that 

A  thematic  analysis  drawing  on  the  techniques  of  Braun 
and  Clarke  [4]  was  carried  out,  using  transcribed  audio-
recordings of the in-depth second interviews, to identify the 
nature  and  forms  of  engagement  and  disengagement  with 

Enabling Healthy BehaviorsCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA3047 
NewLeaf.  We  also  tracked  usage  patterns  by  recording 
every 'click' in NewLeaf made during the 4 week trial. 

FINDINGS 
A common criterion for successful quitting is to be smoke-
free  for  6  months  [34].  It  was  not  possible  therefore  to 
examine  participants'  success  of  smoking  cessation,  but 
rather  we  focussed  on  how 
their  quit  attempt  was 
proceeding and their engagement with the app. 

Based  on  the  second  interviews  at  week  4  of  the  trial, 
participants  were  classified  according  to  the  reported 
success  of  their  quit  attempt  so  far.  We  first  distinguished 
between  those  who  presented  as  'Succeeding'  so  far  (S) 
from those who presented as 'Not-Succeeding' (N). Among 
those  Succeeding,  we  further  distinguished  between  those 
who had totally abstained from smoking throughout the trial 
(S1-S8)  from  those  with  a  qualified  report  (S9-S16)  in 
which they  had either cut-down and  were  on track  to quit, 
or  were  quitting  but  had  experienced  minor  relapses. 
Among  those  who  were  Not-Succeeding,  we  distinguished 
those who had not managed to make any quit attempt (N1-
N4) from those who had tried but relapsed (N5-N7). 

Light smokers, who smoke 5 or less cigarettes per day [28], 
are  likely  to  find  quitting  less  challenging  than  heavier 
smokers.  Given  our  intention  to  explore  the  variety  of 
experiences  we included them in our  study, but  to provide 
greater context we label them with the letter L, e.g., S6L.  

Participants were asked directly in interviews if they had an 
overall  positive,  negative  or  neutral  experience  of  using 
each  of  the  three  resources  in  NewLeaf:  stories,  tips  and 
distractions.  These  affective  responses  are  summarized  in 
the  top  rows  of  Figure  2  (heavy  smokers)  and  Figure  3 
(light  smokers).  Positive  experience  (shown  as  +)  implies 
that participants spoke of valuing the resource and believing 
it to be useful for quitting. Negative reactions (shown as x) 
implies  that  participants  reported  that  the  resource  was 
annoying, off-putting, pointless, or similar. Figures 2 and 3 
show that there was a variety of reactions to the three forms 
of  content.  Figure  2  indicates  that,  among  the  heavier 
smokers, stories were more likely to have produced positive 
affect  (shown  as    +  in  Figure  2)  by  participants  who 
reported  that  they  were  Succeeding  in  their  quit  attempt 
than by those  who  were Not-Succeeding. This pattern  was 
not evident among the light smokers (Figure 3). 

The  lower  panels of  Figures  2 and 3 show the intensity of 
usage  of  NewLeaf  over  the  first  3  weeks  of  the  trial, 
measured by the number of significant interactions with the 
app.  We  do  not  include  the  fourth  week  where  there  was 
often  a  spike  of  usage  during  and  around  the  second 
interview.  A  significant  interaction  was  defined  as  one  of 
the following: the opening of a specific content item (story, 
tip or distraction); posting of an item of content; favouriting 
or  unfavouriting  of  an  item;  upvoting  or  downvoting  an 
item;  a  login.  A  score  of  1  in  Figures  2  and  3  thus 
represents a simple login to the app, and might involve the 

undetected  browsing  of  content  lists,  but  did  not  involve 
opening  of  specific  items  or  responding  to  them.  Scores 
above  1  indicate  the  inclusion  of  some  of  these  more 
significant interactions, up to the highest daily score of 405 
which  implies  a  prolonged  session  of  many  significant 
interactions. 

Most striking in Figures 2 and 3 is that there is no apparent 
association  between  the  intensity  of  using  NewLeaf  and 
either the status of participants as being Succeeding or Not-
Succeeding,  or  the  affective  responses  of  participants  to 
stories,  tips  and  distractions.  Succeeding  participants  S2 
and S12, for example, show high intensity usage over the 3 
weeks,  but  Not-Succeeding  N4L,  N5,  N6  also  show 
moderately  high  usage.  Conversely,  the  lowest  usage  is 
shown by 3 Succeeding participants, S7L, S3 and S11, with 
the  Not-Succeeding  N3  and  N7L  also  being  relatively  low 
intensity  users.  This  qualitative  dissociation  between 
intensity  of  use  and  the  status  of  quit  attempts  is  a 
significant  observation  which  informs  our  discussion  of 
engagement patterns below. 

Trajectories of engagement and disengagement  
Thematic analysis of the second interviews revealed a  rich 
variety  of  experiences  in  using  NewLeaf,  including  both 
positive  and  negative  reactions  to  the  app  and  its  value  in 
supporting  a  quit  attempt.  Figure  4  shows  a  conceptual 
model  that  was  developed  through  our  analysis  to  classify 
patterns  of  engagement  and  disengagement.  We  will 
overview  this  model  first,  before  describing  the  evidence 
that underpins it. 

The  model  in  Figure  4  depicts  attempts  to  undergo 
digitally-mediated  behaviour  change  as  a  journey,  or 
trajectory,  from  a  current  to  a  desired  behaviour  state;  in 
this  case,  from  being  a  smoker  to  being  a  non-smoker.  In 
between are various intermediate states defined by different 
forms  of  engagement  or  disengagement  with  the  digital 
tool. Alternative trajectories of attempted behaviour change 
are  shown  in  the  form  of  paths  that  people  might  follow 
through  these  various  states.  Each  person's  trajectory  may 
contain  a  mixture  of  'steps  forward'  towards  the  desired 
state,  or  'steps  backward'  towards  the  current  state.  The 
trajectories in Figure 4 are not meant to be exhaustive, but 
rather they reflect prominent observed patterns in our study 
participants. 

The  model  thus  shows  how  attempts  at  digitally-mediated 
behaviour  change  might  progress  along  very  different 
trajectories. From the current state as a smoker, each person 
undertakes  exploratory  engagement  with  the  app,  a  step 
which  was  induced  by  the  procedure  of  the  first  interview 
of our study. Once into the trial, a participant may then shift 
to  a  state  that  we  describe  as  productive  engagement 
meaning that they  are actively consulting and applying the 
resources  of  the  app  to  quitting.  However,  as  our  model 
shows  we  observed  other  states  that  allow  for  alternative 
trajectories: counterproductive engagement, non-productive 
disengagement,  and  productive  disengagement.  In  the 

Enabling Healthy BehaviorsCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA3048Participant 

Base rate cig/day 

S2 

20 

S12 

S5 

10 

8 

S1 

30 

S9 

20 

S4 

10 

S10 

20 

S3 

12 

S11  N5  N6  N1 

10 

20 

6 

10 

N2 

10 

N3 

7 

Succeeding  

Not-Succeeding 

Stories 

Tips 

Distractions 

Week 1     1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Week 2     8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
Week 3   15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
20 
21 

+ 

x 

x 

405 
224 
175 
111 
134 
109 
75 
46 
73 
67 
55 
24 
97 
58 
32 
27 
30 
55 
48 
21 
34 

+ 

+ 

+ 

70 
18 
16 
3 
14 
3 
6 

4 
2 
21 
3 
4 

13 

11 
2 
11 
1 
4 

Affective response to NewLeaf resources:   +  positive       x  negative   
(blank indicating neither) 

+ 

+ 

+ 

x 

+ 

x 

+ 

x 

+ 

x 

+ 

x 

+ 

+ 

x 

x 

x 

x 

x 

+ 

x 

x 

Intensity of Use: Counts of significant interactions with NewLeaf  
34 
11 
47 
15 

30 
36 
14 

20 
15 
10 

108 
26 

44 
1 

25 

26 

15 
59 
25 
9 

12 
24 
57 
26 
1 

16 
34 

6 

4 

13 
12 

22 
2 

4 

6 
1 

2 

2 

1 

6 
3 

28 
6 
5 

15 
16 
5 

4 

19 

3 
1 
1 

18 
9 

12 

16 
1 

13 

3 

Figure 2. Data for heavy smokers: Base rates of smoking (top panel); Participants' affective response to stories, tips and 
distractions in the NewLeaf app (middle panel); and tracking data of the total number of significant interactions with the NewLeaf 
app by each participant during the study (lower panel) (See Findings section for the definition of significant interactions.) 

following sections we explain and describe these states, the 
evidence for them, and the resulting trajectories. 

Productive engagement 
Productive engagement is a state envisaged, and hoped for, 
under the engagement-efficacy perspective. While we argue 
here is that there are other significant states and trajectories 
that  arise,  productive  engagement  is  nevertheless  a  very 
important  state.  This  section  now  considers  the  shape  that 
productive engagement took in our study by identifying the 
characteristics of stories, and sometimes expert health tips, 
that  were  reported  as  eliciting  meaningful  and  positive 
engagement with NewLeaf. 

Authenticity, currency and contextualized advice 
Participants  who  were  positive  about  posted  stories  spoke 
of them as being more authentic than the expert health tips. 
Curiously,  although  the  stories  were  themselves  simply 
textual posts, they were experienced as somehow more 'real' 

and  alive  than  expert  health  advice:  'it’s  perspective  from 
real  people,  real  time  rather  than  you’re  reading  a  blog 
post on the internet' (S2); 'I mean the tips are just tips, like 
expert tips but the things people post they are real and this 
actually  happened  to  them'  (S12).  Just  four  Succeeding 
quitters  and  two  Not-Succeeding  quitters,  reported  that 
expert  tips  were  valuable  because  of  the  credibility  of  the 
source  (S11,  S12,  N2,  N6).  But  there  was  less  need  to 
engage with tips frequently as a Not-Succeeding participant 
pointed out: 'the first few days I saw all the  tips  that were 
there  ...  so it’s not like I’m going to be using that feature 
every day' (N2).  

Related  to  the  sense  of  the  authenticity  around  stories, 
participants were positive about their currency; that is, they 
recognised that the stories were recently created, a result of 
the  high  turnover  of  posts  and  growing  comment  trails.  In 
contrast, the expert tips were more static: 'if I jumped back 
in it’s like ‘oh, I’ve seen that one already.  Why is that still  

Enabling Healthy BehaviorsCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA3049  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
Participant 

S15L  S13L 

S6L 

S16L 

S8L 

S14L 

S7L  N4L  N7L 

Base rate cig/day 

3 

5 

3 

0.5 

1 

3 

2 

2 

4 

Succeeding 

Not- 
Succeeding 

+ 

x 

13 

21 

2 

6 

Affective response to NewLeaf resources:  
 +  positive   x  negative  (blank indicating neither) 

+ 

x 

+ 

+ 

x 

x 

+ 

+ 

+ 

x 

+ 

x 

+ 

Intensity of Use: Counts of significant interactions with NewLeaf 

36 

31 

13 

54 

27 

6 

37 

18 

6 

2 

2 

30 

2 

1 

1 

4 

2 

9 

3 

19 

8 

12 

9 

3 

15 

16 

5 

8 

19 

21 

12 

20 

14 

4 

13 

16 

2 

2 

31 

34 

4 

14 

3 

Stories 

Tips 

Distractions 

Week 1     1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

Week 2     8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

Week 3   15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

+ 

+ 

51 

1 

1 

8 

48 

6 

14 

14 

1 

10 

4 

Figure 3. Data for light smokers: Base rates of smoking (top panel); Participants' affective response to stories, tips and distractions 
in the NewLeaf app (middle panel); and tracking data of the total number of significant interactions with the NewLeaf app by each 
participant during the study (lower panel) (See Findings section for the definition of significant interactions.) 

sitting  there?’    It  was  mainly  to  hear  what  other  people 
were saying' (N6). 

The  greater  attraction  to  stories  over  expert  tips  was  not 
because  participants  were  avoiding  practical  support.  On 
the  contrary,  and  consistent  with  the  notion  of  productive 
engagement,  most  participants  strongly  preferred  stories 
that  contained  specific  advice  that  was  contextualized 
within the personal narrative: 'I’d prefer that someone who 
is say on the same page as I am gives me that information 
rather  than  a  doctor  ...  '  (S5).  As  suggested  by  one 
participant,  the  attraction  of  authenticity,  currency  and 
contextualized  advice  was  that  they  created  a  sense  of 
agency  in  the  quitter;  a  feeling  that  the  decision  to  quit 
comes from the quitter themself, and not through obedience 

to a health expert: 'there's still a lot of people out there that 
are  trying  to  quit,  not  because  we're  forced  to  quit  but 
because it's our own decision to do it' (S9). 

further 

critical 

Identifying with the story poster 
A 
aspect  underpinning  productive 
engagement  was  whether  participants  could  identify  with 
the poster's situation and experience: 'Oh, some of them are 
textbook cases of me, it's like I could have written it' (S3). 
For  most  participants,  identifying  with  others  at  the  same 
stage  of  quitting  was  powerful:  'it’s  like  relating  your 
experience  to  theirs  and  trying  to  find  what  you  can  do 
about  it.'  (S12).  Some  participants  noted  specifically  how 
similar experiences elicited a particular kind of empathetic 
engagement: 'for me it was helpful because I started going  

Enabling Healthy BehaviorsCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA3050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
COUNTER-
PRODUCTIVE 
ENGAGEMENT 

PRODUCTIVE 
ENGAGEMENT 

CURRENT 
BEHAVIOUR 
STATE 

EXPLORATORY 
ENGAGEMENT 

DESIRED 
BEHAVIOUR 
STATE 

NON-PRODUCTIVE 
DISENGAGEMENT 

PRODUCTIVE 
DISENGAGEMENT 

Figure 4. A conceptual model of alternative trajectories of digitally-mediated behaviour change. Solid arrows indicate progress 
towards the desired behaviour state (of being a non-smoker), while dotted arrows show regression back to the current behaviour 
state (of being a smoker)  

through  a  lot  of,  like,  the  panic  stuff  and  the  anxiety  stuff 
and all of that came up for me that’s never been there.  So it 
was good to read.' (S2). 

family, 

their  everyday  world  of 

Limits of productive engagement 
Nearly  all  participants  valued  the  fact  that  the  online 
community of quitters presented by NewLeaf was separate 
from 
friends  and 
colleagues.  They  valued  their  anonymity,  with  many 
commenting  that  they  would  not  want  to  conduct  this 
activity  in  Facebook.  But  although  they  felt  secure  in  the 
anonymity  of  NewLeaf,  there  was  extreme  reluctance  to 
post content, even among the Succeeding quitters who were 
productively engaged: 'I know its anonymous but I'm hiding 
from  myself.'  (S3);  'I  guess  because  there  is  always  that 
chance  that  you  might  not  succeed  and  you  don’t  want  to 
put it out there in the public domain.' (S13L). Others posted 
with trepidation: 'At first I was like one of those shy people 
"Should  I  say  something?  Should  I  not  say  something? 
What are they going to think of what I've said?" ... and so I 
ummed and ahhed for a while before I hit the  button' (S9). 
One  clear  exception  to  this  was  the  intensely  productive 
engager  S2  who  did  post  and  interact  successfully:  '…  it 
was  quite  good  and  it  was  when  I  started  ...  and  it  was 
really  rough  and  they  kept  checking  in,  “How  are  you 
doing now?" ' (S2). 

Non-productive  disengagement  and  counterproductive 
engagement 
As  captured  in  our  model  in  Figure  4,  however,  not  all 
resembling  productive 
participants  achieved  anything 
engagement.  For  some,  lack  of  interest  in  the  stories,  tips 
and distractions meant that the app simply failed to provide 
any  support for a quit attempt,  a state  we describe as non-

reported 

the  Not-
productive  disengagement.  For  example, 
Succeeding  N2 
exploratory 
engagement led to non-productive disengagement: 'it really 
was really informative and it reminds you of how difficult it 
is, at the end of the day, to quit ... I’m not the sort of person 
who engages that much with initiatives like that' (N2) 

initial 

how 

More  interestingly,  we  also  observed  counterproductive 
engagement  with NewLeaf  which involved  more  sustained 
use  of  its  quit  resources,  but  with  the  opposite  of  the 
intended  effect.  This  was  often  expressed  as  antipathy 
towards  success  stories  posted  by  ex-smokers,  that  grew 
into  a  stance  against  the  spirit  of  NewLeaf  and  against 
quitting  generally.  N6,  for  example,  was  a  relatively 
frequent  user  of  the  app  and  a  keen  reader  of  stories.  But 
while  liking  some  stories,  she  experienced  ex-smoker 
stories  negatively:  'they’re  doing  it  to  help  and  give  you 
encouragement, but I didn’t see it that way.  I saw it as  "I 
can’t believe you have time that you can be bothered doing 
this"  and  it  didn’t  make  me  feel  "oh,  one  day  I’ll  feel  like 
that" '. (N6) Unusually, N6 went from smoking 6 cigarettes 
per  day  to  20  by  the  second  interview,  reporting  this  as 
being  related  to  other  circumstances;  again  confirming  the 
importance of external factors in participant outcomes. 

Also  illustrating  counterproductive  engagement,  the  light 
smoker  N4L  was  a  relatively  steady  engager  with  stories. 
But  for  him  the  experience  was  overall  very  negative: 
'reading  some  of  the  guys'  successful  experience  is...  you 
know, it's like torture to me, because I’m a failure, I didn’t 
make  it  happen'  (N4L).  Further,  N4L  was  adamantly 
opposed  to  the  potential  for  social  interaction  through 
NewLeaf:  '...  I  really  don't  want  you  guys  to  make  this  ... 

Enabling Healthy BehaviorsCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA3051 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
like  a social app, like Facebook  or Twitter ... I don't want 
two-way.  Yeah, one-way is enough...' (N4L). Such negative 
experiences  were  high  among 
the  Not-Succeeding 
participants.  N1  found  it  too  difficult  to  engage  with  any 
story:  'I  just  couldn't  really  relate  to  myself  ...  It's  like  I 
don't know, ... I don't even know who they are'. And the idea 
of posting was repugnant: 'I don't want to expose myself in 
that sense to others, or strangers, and saying like oh I can't 
do  this  or  whatever'  (N1).  For  N5,  who  had  successfully 
quit in previous years but since relapsed, this sentiment was 
even  stronger:    '…  to  read  people's  stories  who'd  been 
really successful and gotten a year of not smoking and had 
really  progressed  ...  I  remember  what  that  was  like  but  it 
was  a  little  bittersweet  to  read  them  because  I  don't  know 
that I had a great deal of faith in myself to be able to get to 
that point again.' (N5). N5 did post a story, but the limited 
response led to more discouragement:  'The responses I got 
from the big long post were fine but it was all kind of short' 
(N5). 

Productive disengagement 
We  now  come  to  the  identification  of  a  fourth  significant 
state  in  the  trajectories  of  some  participants,  that  of 
productive  disengagement.  This  describes  situations  where 
participants,  who were productively engaging with the app 
and  embarked  on  a  succeeding  quit  attempt,  then  actively 
decided to disengage with the app because it was reminding 
them of smoking. This was the most striking and surprising 
observation of our study in which reduced engagement with 
NewLeaf  was  associated  with  a  strong  quit  attempt. 
Productive disengagement is related to phenomena like the 
gateway effect [29] in which a tool outlives its usefulness or 
where people progress from one behaviour change resource 
to  another.  But 
it  significantly  different.  Productive 
disengagement  was  not  simply  NewLeaf  reaching  the  end 
of its relevance, but involved the active decision to suppress 
all  reminders  of  the  behaviour  state  of  smoking,  including 
quit resources.  

Productive  disengagement  was  evidenced  primarily  in 
interview reports, but it is also supported by the usage logs, 
particularly  for  heavier  smokers  (Figure  2).  It  can  be  seen 
that  while  S2  and  S12  maintained  productive  engagement 
across  the  3  weeks  of  the  trial,  the  other  7  Succeeding 
quitters  stopped  almost  abruptly  during  the  first  week.  As 
one put it: 'I think an app like this has to be something you 
can use and stop using .. there are some people who clearly 
come back to this forum years after they've quit but I think 
most  people  would  rather  get  that  over  with'  (S9).  The 
problem of giving up smoking was transferred to, or at least 
combined with the problem of giving up the app. For some, 
productive  disengagement  was  not  just  with  the  app,  S1 
reported  the  same  for  nicotine  chewing  gum:  'I  just  didn’t 
want to have to be to a schedule like smoking cos I’d just be 
thinking about smoking every time I was doing something.' 
(S1). 

The state  of productive disengagement  was noted as being 
different  from  the  earlier  attraction  to  the  app  during 
productive engagement when the aim was ' just keeping the 
idea  of  quitting  alive  in  your  brain  ...  like  it’d  just  keep 
reminding you' (S10). For participant S9, the realisation that 
she  would  need  to  productively  disengage  with  NewLeaf 
appeared to occur relatively early on at the outset of the quit 
attempt. It co-existed with the initial desire to productively 
engage, and this set up a conflicting initial experience: '… it 
was  just  conscious  sitting  on  my  mind  that  I  want  a 
cigarette  but  I  should  use  the  app.    Then  using  the  app  is 
actually  reminding  me  of  a  cigarette'  (S9).  This  conflict 
underlay  caution  about  posting  her  own  stories,  because  it 
could  seem  to  lock  in  a  form  of  engagement:  'I  have  to 
remember to go back and read what I wrote and did I have 
replies  and  that's  more  of  "You're  thinking  of  cigarettes" 
sort of a thing.' (S9). Many participants spoke of a desire to 
go back to the app in the  distant but not immediate  future:  
'you  don’t  want  to  be  reminded.    However,  I  would  still… 
like to check stories of people who have quit for as long as I 
have  or  even  longer,  so  I  can  …  I  can  look  beyond,  you 
know, and aim for like a bigger goal.' (S5) 

The  active  maintenance  of  productive  engagement  and 
productive disengagement 
What  characterized  the  Succeeding  quitters  in  our  study 
from  those Not-Succeeding was the way they  were able to 
actively follow a trajectory of productive engagement, often 
followed  closely  by  productive  disengagement.  They 
appeared to use adaptive strategies to stick to this trajectory 
and 
to  avoid  counterproductive  engagement  or  non-
productive disengagement. This was despite the Succeeding 
quitters  suffering  many  of  the  same  negative  reactions  to 
stories in NewLeaf as the Not-Succeeding participants.  

For  example,  even  among  the  Succeeding  quitters,  there 
was  discomfort  with  the  perceived  triumphalism  of  ex-
smokers, particularly if they did not express the struggle to 
reach success: the stories ... helps you in understanding or 
helping  you  through  your  quit  process  ...  well  yeah 
everything except the ones that say "a hundred days" (S12). 
The  health  tips  in  NewLeaf  could  also  provoke  negative 
reactions:  'We  all  know  how  lung  cancer  looks  like  ...  It’s 
not  like  we’re  back  in  the  40s  and  the  doctor  would  open 
the  consulting  room  with  a  cigarette  in  his  mouth  and  tell 
you smoking is good for you. We know that it’s not good for 
you.' (S5) 

But  Succeeding  quitters  typically  avoided  moving  into  a 
sustained  form  of  counterproductive  engagement,  by 
selecting stories that fitted their stage of quitting and which 
they  could  relate  to  and  use  productively:  '…  there’s  a  lot 
that  "I’ve  had  a  cigarette  and  I’ve  relapsed"  I  don’t  read 
those  ...    I  do  not  need  verification  that  you  could  go 
backwards.'  (S2);  'So  on  the  first  days  I  would  click  on 
stories going my first week as non-smoker, and these days I 
would  go  more  for  like  one  month'  (S5).  Only  two  of  the 
Succeeding  quitters  (S3,  S10)  broke  with  this  pattern  and 

Enabling Healthy BehaviorsCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA3052were keen on reading the fully variety of stories: 'it's human 
and  it's  good  to  see  the  fails  as  well  as  the  successes 
because  the  fails  reminds  you  that  even  though  a  person 
can fail they know what they want to do, they know what's 
right' (S3).  

It  was  through  the  Succeeding  quitters'  disposition  to 
engage  productively  with  NewLeaf  that  some  experienced 
through the app a world of people who did not smoke: 'And 
you  see  that  there  are  certain  people  that  are  very,  very 
prominent already that people mention and go back to and 
they comment on nearly everything, they’re quite active.  So 
it’s  nice  to  know  that  they’re  there,  I  guess.'  (S2).  This 
sense of another world appeared to grow from the engaging 
characteristics  of  stories,  especially  their  authenticity  and 
currency.  Succeeding  quitters  spoke  of  this  world  as  one 
they might soon join. S9 put it: 'Not a quitting club but part 
of  a  nice,  big  group'.    As  these  quitters  productively 
disengaged  with  the  app,  there  were  signs  that  they  were 
not  rejecting  that  online  world,  but  rather  attempting  to 
transplant  it  on  to  their  real  lives.  S5  spoke  of  going  to 
music  festivals,  a  major  trigger  for  smoking,  and  how  she 
would  in  future,  as  a  non-smoker,  have  an  altered 
engagement  with  people,  and  how  the  stories  on  the  app 
helped  her  to  see  that  more  positively:    'So  when  you  feel 
like you’re going to lose that, so it’s good to feel that you’re 
gaining,  you’re  part  of  another  community  that  you  just 
didn’t know about it or you didn’t think about it basically.' 
(S5)  Conversely,  for  the  Not-Succeeding  quitters,  who  did 
not  enjoy  the  story  forum,  it  was  a  counterproductive 
rejection of any future scenario of being a non-smoker that 
often  underlay  their  reaction.  Participant  N5,  who  made  a 
serious  attempt  to  engage  and  quit  before  relapsing, 
reported:  'maybe it felt a little bit too distant for me like… I 
don't think I was willing to engage in some sort of solidarity 
with other people in it.' (N5). 

DISCUSSION 
From  our  study  of  23  people's  real-life  attempts  to  quit 
smoking, we have presented a picture of the rich variety of 
their  responses  to  using  an  app  for  behaviour  change.  The 
model  in  Figure  4  offers  a  way  to  interpret  this  variety  by 
conceptualizing  alternative  trajectories  that  people  might 
take,  passing  through  different  states  of  engagement  and 
disengagement  with  the  digital  aid. The  trajectories  shown 
in Figure 4 depict the key paths observed in our study. 

Importantly,  our  model  expresses  a  dissociation  between 
the  intensity of using a digital tool and progress towards a 
desired  behaviour  state.  Four  states  of  the  model  express 
this  dissociation.  Productive  engagement  entails  positive 
progress  in  behaviour  change  coupled  with  high  app  use, 
while  non-productive  disengagement  entails  negative 
progress  with  low  use.  Together  these  are  the  expected 
outcomes  under  the  engagement-efficacy  perspective  that 
we  argued  is  implicit  in  much  design  and  research. 
However,  two  other  states  captured  in  our  model  are 
inconsistent  with  it.  Counterproductive  engagement  entails 

negative  progress  in  behaviour  change  coupled  with  high 
app  use,  and  productive  disengagement  entails  positive 
progress with low use. 

Our  account  is  supported  by  the  lack  of  a  qualitative 
association  between  the  intensity  of  people's  interactions 
with  the  NewLeaf  app  and  the  reported  success  of  their 
ongoing  quit  attempts  during  the  first  3  weeks.  For  the 
heavier  smokers 
the  Succeeding 
(Figure  2),  2  of 
participants  (S2  and  S12)  used  the  app  intensively  for  the 
whole  trial  and  continued  for  several  days  after.  But  the 
other  7  Succeeding  participants  used  the  app  intensively 
only on the first few days of  the trial but then used it very 
little if at all. Our interpretation, as expressed in the model 
of Figure 4, is that while S2 and S12 engaged productively 
with  NewLeaf  throughout  the  trial,  many  of  the  other 
Succeeding  quitters  moved  along  a 
trajectory  from 
exploratory to productive engagement, then after a few days 
on to productive disengagement.  

Among  the  Not-Succeeding  participants  there  was  also 
great  variation  in  the  intensity  of  interaction  with  the  app, 
but more intermittent use of it across the trial. Some of the 
Not-Succeeding  participants  exhibited  quite  high  levels  of 
use  but  this  was  often  in  a  state  of  counterproductive 
engagement,  particularly  N5,  N6  and  N4L.  These 
participants were consumed by an antagonistic reception of 
other  peoples'  quitting  stories,  especially,  but  not  only, 
those of triumphant ex-smokers. This was distinct from the 
other  Not-Succeeding  participants  who  were  not 
antagonistic  but  merely  failed  to  engage,  a  reaction  which 
we describe as non-productive disengagement in Figure 4.  

Productive  disengagement  is  a  surprising  and  striking 
observation  of  our  study.  It  is  related  to,  but  nevertheless 
distinct  from, other  reported  forms of reduced engagement 
during  behaviour  change,  such  as  the  'gateway  effect'  [29] 
and 'happy abandonment' [7]. These effects imply situations 
where  people  have  succeeded  with  their  change,  or  switch 
to  upgraded  or  different 
technologies.  Productive 
disengagement  as  observed  here,  in  contrast,  involved  the 
active  attempt  to  banish  thoughts  about  smoking,  and  this 
required  not  thinking  about  quitting  too.  The  timing  of 
transitions  from  productive  engagement  to  disengagement 
were variable but could happen after as little as one or two 
days; time for a quitter to gain enough motivation, through 
the  app  or  elsewhere,  and  then  proceed  to  a  state  of  not 
thinking about smoking or quitting. 

This  interpretation,  of  a  form  of  active  and  productive 
disengagement,  as  opposed  to  losing  interest,  is  confirmed 
by the fact that 8 of the 9 Succeeding quitters in the heavier 
smoking  group  (Figure  2)  were  very  positive  about  the 
value of stories. They valued them as authentic and current, 
and  preferred  them  as  a  source  of  advice  over  the  expert 
health tips. Conversely, 4 out of 5  Not-Succeeding heavier 
smokers had a  negative reaction to stories  which led some 
on  a  trajectory  from  exploratory  to  counterproductive 
to  simply 
engagement,  and  others  from  exploration 

Enabling Healthy BehaviorsCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA3053disengaging non-productively as they gave  up the  tool and 
their quit attempt. All returned to the current state of being 
a  smoker  and  not  attempting  to  change,  at  least  for  now. 
While  we do not claim any causal connection between  the 
use of stories and quitting, interview testaments, at least for 
the  heavier  smokers,  were  consistent  with  the  idea  that 
engaging productively with stories in NewLeaf was a likely 
characteristic  of  people  embarked  on  a  Succeeding  quit 
attempt,  and  not  engaging  productively  with  stories  more 
often characterized those who were Not-Succeeding.  

These  finding  can  be  considered  in  terms  of  the  trans-
theoretical or stages  model of quitting. Consistent  with He 
et  al’s  [14]  argument  that  behaviour  change  apps  should 
tailor  their  content  to  people's  stage  of  change,  most 
participants  in  our  study  preferred  to  engage  with  stories 
from people in a similar situation to themselves. Moreover, 
their  preferences  changed  as  they  moved  from  being  'just 
quit'  to  maintaining  an  ongoing  quit  attempt.  It  was  also 
evident that the Succeeding quitters were able to adaptively 
select stories to match their situation, suggesting that a story 
in  some 
forum  can  provide  ‘one  size 
circumstances.  To  do 
ready 
this, 
identification of the poster's stage of quitting. It was notable 
that may Not-Succeeding participants were not able to find 
suitable stories, and many were fixated on stories that they 
found off-putting. 

to  fit  all’ 
it  must  support 

Implications of the trajectories model 
As  noted  earlier,  Klasnja  et  al  [17]  argue  that  HCI 
researchers  working  on  health  technologies  cannot  easily 
measure  their  success  by  final  health  outcomes,  so  instead 
they should use intermediate  indicators, such as the uptake 
of  behaviours  believed  to  have  a  positive  influence. 
Engagement  with  the  technology  may  appear  at  first  to  be 
one such intermediate indicator, in terms of the strength  of 
affective  response  or  in  terms  of  intensity  of  use.  While 
engagement is of course important,  our study  points to the 
dangers  of  relying  on  strong  user  engagement  with  a 
behaviour change app as an indicator of success. 

The  model  of  alternative  trajectories,  developed  here 
(Figure  4),  offers    a  set  of  potentially  valuable  sensitizing 
concepts  for  designers  of  behaviour  change  technologies, 
especially  for  addiction  support.  The  notion  of  productive 
disengagement,  in  particular,  suggests  that  users  need  the 
utmost  control  over  when and how they use  these  devices, 
and  points  to  the  dangers  of  conventional  prompts  like 
notifications  that  seek  to  remind  or  otherwise  draw  users 
back into direct engagement. Rather, the user should be free 
to  disengage  and  stay  disengaged  and  this  should  not  be 
treated  as  a  failure  of  either  user  or  technology.  Equally, 
users should be free to lurk and observe without even gentle 
coercion 
to  post  content  or  comments.  Again  such 
interactions  can  be  perceived  as  locking  in  a  form  of 
engagement  that  was  not  attractive  to  participants  in  our 
study, including those who were Succeeding so far in their 
quit attempts. 

to 

technologies 

These implications of productive disengagement are mostly 
that  help  people  combat 
applicable 
addictions like smoking, gambling, alcohol and drug use. In 
these  situations,  it  is  desirable  to  reach  a  state  of  not 
thinking  about  the  objects  of  addiction.  Other  kinds  of 
behaviour  change,  such  as  energy  conservation,  are  less 
relevant perhaps and  involve  valid  goals to  make the  need 
for  change  an  ongoing  awareness.  Yet  even  in  these 
situations,  the  notion  of  productive  disengagement  has 
relevance,  in  that  users  should  preferably  internalize  new 
ways  of  thinking  and  new  habits,  so  that  they  become 
independent  of 
this 
approach  for assistive technology;  for example, Stawarz  et 
al  [31],  working  on  medication  reminder  tools,  argue  for 
technology-independent  habit 
designs 
formation as opposed to ongoing technology-dependence.   

tools.  Recent  research  supports 

achieve 

that 

CONCLUSION 
Our study offers new evidence about the variety of forms of 
engagement  and  disengagement  with  digital  tools  for 
behaviour  change.  It  reveals  how  strong  user  engagement 
can  sometimes  be  a  positive  sign,  but  only  if  the  user  is 
productively  engaged  with  the  tool.  However,  engagement 
may be counterproductive, as with antagonistic reactions to 
content  that  push  users  away  from  their  original  goal. 
Equally,  users  may  undertake  a  counter-intuitive  form  of 
productive disengagement in which they actively decide to 
discontinue using a digital tool. This is not a rejection of the 
value  of  the  tool,  but  rather  a  strategy  to  banish  thinking 
about  adverse  behaviours  in  a  positive  continuation  of  the 
attempt to change.  

Our 
resulting  model  of  alternative 
trajectories  of 
therefore 
engagement  and  disengagement  (Figure  4) 
suggests  caution  against  any  simplistic  interpretation  of 
usage  tracking  data  as  an  indicator  of  success  for  HCI 
design  of  tools  for  behaviour  change.  People's  trajectories 
in  this  domain  are  typically  too  complex  and  subtle  to  be 
captured in a numerical log of usage frequency or intensity. 
At  least  in  the  context  of  addiction  support,  our  model 
suggests that behaviour change apps should be designed to 
give users maximum control over their level of engagement 
and disengagement and avoid features such as notifications 
that seek to trigger or even lock in particular patterns of use. 

Finally,  our  study  illustrates  a  different  perspective  to  that 
of  persuasive  technology.  Whether  people  embark  on 
behaviour  change  is  a  result  of  many  external  factors,  of 
personal  motivation  and  circumstances.  Rather  than  our 
NewLeaf  tool  being  seen  to  persuade  people,  it  is  better 
understood  as  a  resource  that  allowed  Succeeding  quitters 
to channel their various sources of motivation to embark on 
an attempted behaviour change.  

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This  research  was  funded  by  Cancer  Council  Victoria  and 
the  Australian  Research  Council 
grant 
LP110100046. We are also grateful for input from smoking 
cessation counsellors from Quit Victoria. 

(ARC) 

Enabling Healthy BehaviorsCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA3054REFERENCES 
1.  Elena Agapie, Lucas Colusso, Sean A. Munson, and 

Gary Hsieh. 2016. PlanSourcing: Generating Behavior 
Change Plans with Friends and Crowds. In 
Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on 
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing (CSCW '16). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
119-133. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org.ezp.lib.unimelb.edu.au/10.1145/28180
48.2819943   

2.  Eric P.S. Baumer, Sherri Jean Katz, Jill E. Freeman, et 
al. 2012. Prescriptive Persuasion and Open-ended 
Social Awareness: Expanding the Design Space of 
Mobile Health. In Proceedings of the ACM 2012 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work, ACM, 475–484. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2145204.2145279 

3.  Ron Borland. 2013. Understanding Hard to Maintain 
Behaviour Change: A Dual Process Approach. John 
Wiley & Sons, Somerset, UK. 

4.  Braun, V. and Clarke, V. 2006. Using thematic analysis 

in psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology 3, 
2, 77-101. 

5.  Hronn Brynjarsdottir, Maria Håkansson, James Pierce, 
Eric Baumer, Carl DiSalvo, and Phoebe Sengers. 2012. 
Sustainably Unpersuaded: How Persuasion Narrows 
Our Vision of Sustainability. In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, ACM, 947–956. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208539 

6.  Munmun De Choudhury and Sushovan De. 2014. 

Mental Health Discourse on reddit: Self-Disclosure, 
Social Support, and Anonymity.In Proceedings of 8th 
International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social 
Media. Retrieved September 22, 2015 from 
http://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/ICWSM/ICWSM14
/paper/view/8075 

7.  James Clawson, Jessica A. Pater, Andrew D. Miller, 
Elizabeth D. Mynatt, and Lena Mamykina. 2015. No 
Longer Wearing: Investigating the Abandonment of 
Personal Health-tracking Technologies on Craigslist. In 
Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint 
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, 
ACM, 647–658. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2807554 

8.  Alan D. DeSantis. 2002. Smoke screen: an 

ethnographic study of a cigar shop’s collective 
rationalization. Health Communication 14, 2: 167–198. 
http://doi.org/10.1207/S15327027HC1402_2 

9.  Paul Dourish. 2010. HCI and Environmental 

Sustainability: The Politics of Design and the Design 
of Politics. In Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference 
on Designing Interactive Systems, ACM, 1–10. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1858171.1858173 

10.  Epstein, D. A., Caraway, M., Johnston, C., Ping, A., 
Fogarty, J., and Munson, S. A. 2016. Beyond 
Abandonment to Next Steps: Understanding and 
Designing for Life after Personal Informatics Tool Use. 
In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1109-1113). ACM. 

11.  B. J. Fogg. 2003. Persuasive Technology: Using 

Computers to Change What We Think and Do. Morgan 
Kaufmann,  Boston. 

12.  Thomas Fritz, Elaine M. Huang, Gail C. Murphy, and 

Thomas Zimmermann. 2014. Persuasive Technology in 
the Real World: A Study of Long-term Use of Activity 
Sensing Devices for Fitness. In Proceedings of SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
ACM, 487–496. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557383 

13.  Melanie C. Green. 2008. Research challenges in 

narrative persuasion. Information Design Journal 16, 
1: 47–52. http://doi.org/10.1075/idj.16.1.07gre 

14.  Helen Ai He, Saul Greenberg, and Elaine M. Huang. 
2010. One Size Does Not Fit All: Applying the 
Transtheoretical Model to Energy Feedback 
Technology Design. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
ACM, 927–936. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753464 

15.  Eric B. Hekler, Predrag Klasnja, Jon E. Froehlich, and 
Matthew P. Buman. 2013. Mind the Theoretical Gap: 
Interpreting, Using, and Developing Behavioral Theory 
in HCI Research. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
ACM, 3307–3316. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466452 

16.  Leslie J. Hinyard and Matthew W. Kreuter. 2007. 

Using Narrative Communication as a Tool for Health 
Behavior Change: A Conceptual, Theoretical, and 
Empirical Overview. Health Education & Behavior 34, 
5: 777–792. http://doi.org/10.1177/1090198106291963 

17.  Predrag Klasnja, Sunny Consolvo, and Wanda Pratt. 

2011. How to evaluate technologies for health behavior 
change in HCI research. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
ACM, 3063–3072. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979396 

18.  Lena Mamykina, Andrew D. Miller, Elizabeth D. 

Mynatt, and Daniel Greenblatt. 2010. Constructing 
identities through storytelling in diabetes management. 
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, 1203–1212. 
Retrieved September 22, 2015 from 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1753507 

19.  Mark W. Newman, Debra Lauterbach, Sean A. 

Munson, Paul Resnick, and Margaret E. Morris. 2011. 
It’s not that I don’t have problems, I’m just not putting 

Enabling Healthy BehaviorsCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA3055them on Facebook: challenges and opportunities in 
using online social networks for health. In Proceedings 
of the ACM 2011 conference on Computer supported 
cooperative work, ACM, 341–350. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1958824.1958876 

20.  O'Brien HL, Toms EG. 2008. What is user 

engagement? A conceptual framework for defining 
user engagement with technology. Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and 
Technology, 59(6), 938-55. 

21.  Jeni Paay, Jesper Kjeldskov, Mikael B. Skov, Lars 

Lichon, and Stephan Rasmussen. 2015. Understanding 
Individual Differences for Tailored Smoking Cessation 
Apps. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
ACM, 1699–1708. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702321 

22.  James W. Pennebaker and Janel D. Seagal. 1999. 
Forming a story: The health benefits of narrative. 
Journal of clinical psychology 55, 10, 1243–1254. 

27.  John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and 

Matthew Chalmers. 2014. Personal Tracking As Lived 
Informatics. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
ACM, 1163–1172. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557039 

28.  Schane, R. E., Ling, P. M. and Glantz, S. A. Health. 
2010. Effects of Light and Intermittent Smoking: A 
Review. Circulation, 121, 13, 1518-1522. 

29.  Victoria Schwanda, Steven Ibara, Lindsay Reynolds, 

and Dan Cosley. 2011. Side Effects and “Gateway” 
Tools: Advocating a Broader Look at Evaluating 
Persuasive Systems. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
ACM, 345–348. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1978991 

30.  Katie A. Siek, Gillian R. Hayes, Mark W. Newman, 

and John C. Tang. 2014. Field Deployments: Knowing 
from Using in Context. In Ways of Knowing in HCI. 
Springer, New York, 119–142. 

23.  Bernd Ploderer, Wally Smith, Jon Pearce, and Ron 

31.  Katarzyna Stawarz, Anna L. Cox, and Ann Blandford. 

Borland. 2014. A mobile app offering distractions and 
tips to cope with cigarette craving: A qualitative study. 
JMIR mHealth and uHealth 2, 2,  1-23. 
http://doi.org/10.2196/mhealth.3209 

24.  Bernd Ploderer, Wally Smith, Jon Pearce, and Ron 
Borland. 2015. An Object-Centred Approach to 
Encourage Online Participation in the Context of 
Behaviour Change. Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW) 24, 1,  39-6433. 

2015. Beyond Self-Tracking and Reminders: 
Designing Smartphone Apps That Support Habit 
Formation. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
ACM, 2653–2662. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702230 

32.  Sutcliffe, A. 2009. Designing for User Engagement: 
Aesthetic and Attractive User Interfaces. Synthesis 
Lectures on Human-Centered Informatics, 2, 1, 1-55. 

25.  J. O. Prochaska and W. F. Velicer. 1997. The 

33.  Phil Turner. 2010. The anatomy of engagement. In 

transtheoretical model of health behavior change. 
American journal of health promotion: AJHP 12, 1: 
38–48. 

26.  Corbin Reno and Erika S. Poole. 2016. It Matters If My 
Friends Stop Smoking: Social Support for Behavior 
Change in Social Media.  In Proceedings of the 2016 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, ACM, New York, NY, USA,  5548-5552. 
http://dx.doi.org.ezp.lib.unimelb.edu.au/10.1145/28580
36.2858203 

Proceedings of the 28th Annual European Conference 
on Cognitive Ergonomics (ECCE '10). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 59-66. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1962300.1962315 

34.  West, R., Hajek, P., Stead, L., and Stapleton, J. 2005. 
Outcome criteria in smoking cessation trials: proposal 
for a common standard. Addiction 100, 3, 299–303. 

35.  World Health Organisation. 2011. WHO report on the 
global tobacco epidemic. WHO. Retrieved September 
24, 2015 from 
http://www.who.int/tobacco/global_report/2011/en/

Enabling Healthy BehaviorsCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA3056 
 
 
 
 
