Turn to the Self in Human-Computer Interaction: 
Care of the Self in Negotiating the Human-Technology Relationship

Yubo Kou 
 School of Information, Florida State University 
 Tallahassee, FL, United States 
 ykou@fsu.edu 

Xinning Gui, Yunan Chen, Bonnie Nardi 
 Department of Informatics, University of California, Irvine 
 Irvine, CA, United States 
 {guix; yunanc; nardi}@uci.edu 

ABSTRACT 

1 

INTRODUCTION 

Everyday  life  is  increasingly  mediated  by  technology. 
Technology  is  rapidly  growing  capacity  and  complexity, 
especially evident  in developments  in artificial intelligence 
and  big  data  analytics.  As  human-computer  interaction 
(HCI)  endeavors  to  examine  and  theorize  how  people  act 
and 
interact  with  the  ever-evolving  technology,  an 
important, emerging concern is how the self—the totality of 
internal qualities such as consciousness and agency—plays 
out in relation  to  the technology-mediated external  world. 
To  analyze  this  question,  we  draw  from  Michel  Foucault’s 
ethics of “care of the self,” which examines how the self is 
constituted through  conscious and reflective work on self-
transformation.  We  present  three  case  studies  to  illustrate 
how  individuals  carry  out  practices  of  the  self  to  reflect 
upon and negotiate their relationship with technology. We 
discuss 
the  self  and 
importance  of  examining 
foreground  the  notion  of  care  of  the  self  in  HCI  research 
and design. 

the 

CCS Concepts 
• Human-centered computing → Human computer interaction 
(HCI); Empirical studies in HCI 

KEYWORDS:  Care  of  the  self;  Foucault;  ethics;  power; 
existential  HCI;  political  economy;  politics;  neoliberalism; 
censorship; quantified-self; healthcare 

ACM Reference format: 
Yubo Kou, Xinning Gui, Yunan Chen, and Bonnie Nardi. 2018. Turn to the 
Self  in  Human-Computer  Interaction:  Care  of  the  Self  in  Negotiating  the 
Human-Technology  Relationship.  In 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in  Computing  Systems  Proceedings  (CHI  2019),  May  4–9,  2019,  Glasgow, 
Scotland,  UK.  ACM,  New 
pages. 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300711 

York,  NY,  USA. 

14 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed 
for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that  copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full 
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others 
than  the  author(s)  must  be  honored.  Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy 
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK 
©  2019 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5970-2/19/05…$15.00  
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300711 

technology, 

is  often 
Technology,  especially  digital 
envisioned  and  framed  as  enhancing  aspects  of  human 
beings such as knowledge, health, and wellbeing. However, 
studies  of  technology  have  long  questioned  the  politics  of 
and values inscribed in technology design [76,100]. There is 
increasing  appreciation  that  people  are  experiencing 
various 
implications  of  technological  advances,  both 
individually  and  collectively,  manifested  in  increasing 
societal  and  academic  concerns  such  as  algorithmic  bias 
[60], privacy breaches [26], and online disinformation [93].  

Human-computer  interaction  as  a  discipline  is  concerned 
with these challenges and strives to understand the shifting 
human-technology  relationship.  Among  these  concerns,  a 
currently  underexplored  dimension  is  the  self,  concerning 
the integrity of the individual with internal qualities such as 
knowledge, agency, and happiness. Self is a term sitting at 
intersection  of  diverse  relationships  of  selfhood, 
the 
identity, agency, power, and governance. In this paper, we 
explore  how  technology  plays  a  role  with  respect  to  the 
self,  or  the  constitution  of  the  self.  The  technology  we 
discuss in this paper is not  constrained to any single form 
of  digital  technologies.  Rather,  it  leans  towards  a  broader 
sense  of  “technique,”  what  Jacques  Ellul  described  as 
“rationally  arrived  at  and  having  absolute  efficiency  (for  a 
given  stage  of  development)  in  every  field  of  human 
activity” [23]. Technology can be viewed as a constituent of 
structure recurrently enacted through social process [81]. 

Several  separate  areas  of  interest  in  HCI  align  with  this 
question.  Personal  informatics  research  [44,64]  explores 
how self-tracking systems might provide rich and efficient 
data analysis so that users acquire better knowledge about, 
e.g.,  health  and  life.  The  literature  on  online  disclosure 
[54,62,98]  examines  how  digital  technologies  support 
presentation of the self, as well as its social utilities such as 
social  approval  and  social  support.  Empirical  work  and 
design efforts have explored various self-driven practices in 
order  to  enhance  knowledge  about  the  self,  such  as  self-
reflection  [15]  and  introspection  [59].  However,  existing 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 1 
 
research that concerns the self often leans towards stressing 
the functionalities of technology as a medium for delivering 
messages,  or  a  tool  with  explicit  affordances.  In  this  view, 
technology is effectively managed and appropriated at will. 

Critical voices speak against viewing technology and design 
as  neutral,  emphasizing  power  relations  when  examining 
technology and design. Power relations in this context refer 
to relationship in which one exerts control over the conduct 
of  another  [32].  For  example,  feminist  HCI  concerns  how 
interaction design  is  imbued  with existing power  relations 
that  construct  gender  [6,7].  Studies  of  social  justice  in 
systems  ask  how  design  might  avoid 
computing 
perpetuating  issues  such  as  discrimination  and  bias  [21]. 
Participatory design [77] stresses involving all stakeholders 
in  the  design  process,  attempting  to  flatten  the  power 
structure. However, these critical stances tend to highlight 
the role of social or technical structures in shaping the self, 
thus  discussion  of  how  agency 
in  the 
constitution of the self has been a missed opportunity. 

is  exercised 

In this paper, we turn to Michel Foucault’s ethics of “care of 
the  self”  to 
investigate  the  self  in  human-computer 
interaction.  Care  of  the  self,  as  we  shall  discuss  in  detail 
later, denotes “an exercise of the self on the self by which 
one  attempts  to  develop  and  transform  oneself,  and  to 
attain to a certain mode of being” [32]. The certain mode of 
being refers to “a certain state of happiness, purity, wisdom, 
perfection, or immortality” [33]. We suggest that the notion 
of  care  of  the  self,  by  stressing  self-transformation  in 
response to external structure, is highly relevant to critical 
theoretical  development  in  HCI  that  explores  themes  of 
power relations, exploitation, and oppression, as well as the 
growing  empirical  evidence  that  reveals  ramifications  of 
technological innovations over the self. 

Following a case study methodology [101], we present three 
case  studies  to  demonstrate  how  the  notion  of  care  of  the 
self could serve as a starting point in rethinking the human-
technology relationship and providing reflections on design. 
The  first  case  concerns  how  citizens  construct  self-
knowledge  in  a  highly  censored  media  environment  in 
China.  The  second  case  concerns  how  video  game  players 
deal  with  quantification  technology  that  monitors  and 
regulates their gameplay. The third case concerns American 
parents  with  children  under  the  age  of  two  who  are 
negotiating  a  fragmented  healthcare  system  through 
constructing situated knowledge.  

Through  these  three  cases,  we  trace  how  large  social, 
cultural, and technical systems and structures, mediated by 
technology,  impose  knowledge,  either  popular  or  official, 

onto  individuals.  We  studied  how  individuals  came  to  the 
realization  that  they  must  manage  care  of  the  self,  either 
proactively  or  reactively,  and  how  individuals  enacted 
individualistic,  bottom-up  practices  in  order  to  negotiate 
relationships  with  technology.  We  highlight  individuals’ 
constant self-examination and introspection in interactions 
with structural elements in which technology plays a large 
part.  Building  upon  these  three  cases,  we  move  on  to 
discuss  how  the  notion  of  care  of  the  self  invites  critical 
reflections  upon  the  framing  of  technology  in  relation  to 
the  self,  agency,  and  human  wellbeing.  Joining  strands  of 
critical  theories  in  HCI,  we  seek  to  highlight  the  work  of 
the  self  on  the  self  in  managing  technology  at  different 
scales  ranging  from  a  single  technological  point  to  larger 
system thinking. 

2  CARE OF THE SELF AND ITS RELATION TO HCI 

The ethics of care of the self represent a significant turning 
point in Michel Foucault’s long-term investigation into how 
the  self  is  constituted  in  relation  to  the  efforts  from  the 
subjects  and  the  influence  of  the  external  structure,  or 
power relations [10,20]. Power is a loaded term with many 
contested  concepts  and  discussions  in  disciplines  such  as 
philosophy,  sociology,  and  political  science,  and  is  of 
relevance to  HCI. A 2018 survey of CHI  papers discussing 
power  or  empowerment  distinguished  between 
two 
fundamentally  different  notions  of  power:  power-to, 
meaning  the  ability  to  act,  and  power-over,  concerning 
relations between actors [88]. In this paper, the power that 
we  are  discussing  belongs  to  the  second  category  and  is 
inherently relational. 

In Foucault’s early, more renowned works such as Madness 
and Civilization,  The Birth of the Clinic,  and  Discipline and 
Punish:  The  Birth  of  the  Prison,  Foucault  discussed  how 
power relations produce subjectivities through institutional 
regulations, monitoring, and discourses [28,35,36]. Power is 
as  prevalent  as  human  relationships  in  contexts  ranging 
from communication to sexual, institutional, and economic 
occasions.  Power  relations  exist  at  different  levels,  in 
different  forms.  They  are  mobile,  modifiable,  and  flexible 
[32]. 

transmits  knowledge,  which 

Power  and  knowledge  are  inherently  inseparable.  Power 
turn 
produces  and 
reproduces  power  [37].  For  example,  prisoners  are 
controlled through observation and judgments, but also are 
told  what  they  know  and  whether  they  are  behaving  as 
expected.  Those  in  control  establish  standards  and  criteria 
which serve as a basis for knowledge. HCI researchers often 

in 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 2 
 
 
 
 
refer  to  Foucault’s  analysis  of  Bentham’s  Panopticon  as  a 
mode of power/knowledge [51,83,85]. 

The  proposition  of  care  of  the  self  marked  what  many 
scholars  considered  as  Foucault’s  ethical  turn  in  the 
trajectory of his thought [17,49]. Instead of insisting on the 
totalizing  effect  of  power/knowledge,  he  returned  to  an 
ancient conception of ethics where a person examines and 
just  following,  but  also 
reflects  upon  the  self,  not 
problematizing, moral rules [47]. From this point, Foucault 
sought  to  rethink  the  subject,  and  the  constitution  of  the 
subject.  The  subject  is  still  situated  in  complex  power 
  not  simply 
relations  [30].  However,  the  subject  is 
constructed  by  power,  but  actively  partakes 
in  the 
construction  of  power,  and,  thereby,  modifies  himself  or 
herself  [47].  Foucault  thus  stressed,  in  writings  and 
interviews,  the  idea  of  self-cultivation,  or  the  constant 
practice  a  person  carries  out  to  cultivate  the  self.  Such 
practices  denote  “models  proposed  for  setting  up  and 
developing  relationships  with  the  self,  for  self-reflection, 
self-knowledge,  self-examination,  for  the  decipherment  of 
the self by oneself, for the transformations that one seeks to 
accomplish with oneself as object” [31]. 

the  self  because  “the 

Foucault  analyzed  classic  practices  of  the  self  throughout 
history  [33].  For  example,  Socrates  initiated  dialogue  to 
force  self-examination  on  not  only  himself,  but  also  the 
citizens of Athens. Foucault considered this  an orientation 
towards  care  of 
themes  of 
contemplation  of  self  and  care  of  self  are  related 
dialectically  through  dialogue”  [33].  However,  Foucault 
noticed  the  disappearance  of  the  dialectical  structure  in 
history, where stoics often practiced three techniques of the 
self,  including  letters  to  friends  where  a  person  discloses 
and  reflects  upon  the  self;  examination  of  the  self  and 
conscience as to what was done and what should have been 
done;  and  askesis,  through  which  a  person  discovers, 
absorbs, and transforms truth in order to take actions [33]. 
Lastly,  Foucault  discussed  how  confession  and  self-
renunciation in Christianity allow a person to discover the 
hidden 
the 
teacher/master  [33].  Through  these  practices  of  the  self,  a 
person could know and govern the self. 

examination  by 

thought  under 

the 

While Foucault’s inquiry was focused primarily on Western 
practices,  he  acknowledge  that  care  of  the  self  exists  in 
every  civilization,  and  is  “suggested  or  prescribed  to 
individuals in order to determine their identity, maintain it, 
or  transform  it  in  terms  of  a  certain  number  of  ends, 
through relations of self-mastery or self-knowledge” [34]. 

The notion  of  care of  the self is  not new  to HCI  research. 
Lupton  discussed  how  care  of  the  self  is  pertinent  to 
understanding  self-tracking  and  quantified  self  practices 
[70]. She suggested that self-tracking could be viewed as a 
strategy  and  discourse  that  prescribes  what  the  ideal 
individual  should  do  and  be  [70],  and  that  care  of  the  self 
stresses  investigating  the  rationalities  underpinning  the 
techniques that people use to understand themselves, rather 
than accepting them at face value [70]. However, this paper 
concerns technology in a broader sense, including not only 
computing  devices  but  also  large,  complex  sociotechnical 
systems.  As  such,  our  analysis  focuses  primarily  on 
interactions between the self and its external environment. 

Related  to  discussions  of  self-tracking,  and  situated  at  the 
intersection  of  health  and  HCI,  researchers  have  long 
studied self-care [11,80]. Here the notion of self-care, much 
disputed  as  Nunes  and  Fitzpatrick  noted  [80],  stresses 
mostly  how  people  manage  their  health  conditions.  At  a 
deeper level, both self-care in health and care of the self are 
concerned  with  the  neoliberal  rationality  that  expects 
individuals  to  be  responsible  for  themselves  (which  we 
discuss  in  Section  3.3).  However,  self-care  has  focused 
specifically  on  health,  and  the  utilities  of  technologies  in 
this  practice,  while  care  of  the  self  allows  us  to  critically 
examine technology’s power acting on us. 

To  analyze  experiences  of  intimacy  in  the  virtual  world 
Second Life, Bardzell et al. [5] drew upon the notion of care 
of  the  self’s  dual  perspectives  towards  the  constitution  of 
the  self,  that  is,  one  person  both  becomes  subjected  to 
external power relations, and carries out work on his or her 
self.  They  showed  that  the  way  their  participants  worked 
within  the  governance  system  of  Second  Life  was  not 
merely  constraining  but  also  generative,  allowing  them  to 
emergently  and  reflexively  construct  their  identities.  Our 
paper 
the  subject’s  rediscovery  of 
relationships with technology as a way of constructing self-
knowledge,  as  well  as  actions 
to  negotiate  such 
relationships. 

focused  on 

is 

3  RELATED THEORETICAL WORK 

The application of care of the self in this paper is related to 
several theoretical or critical strands of work in HCI. 

3.1  Existential HCI 

Existentialism was considered highly relevant in Foucault’s 
trajectory of thought and later discussions of care of the self 
[19,27].  From  an  existential  perspective,  Kaptelinin 
observed that, “human existence is characterized by a quest 
for authentic being and making one’s life meaningful.  The 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 3 
quest,  for  which  each  individual  is  ultimately  responsible 
himself and herself, opens almost limitless opportunities for 
self-actualization, but is also inherently dramatic” [53]. 

“Existential HCI” was proposed by Light who observed the 
pervasive  intervention  of  digital  technologies  into  all 
aspects  and  every  stage  of  ordinary  life.  She  called  for  a 
phenomenological  inquiry  into  the  meaning  of  particular 
technologies in use in the context of those seeking to make 
sense of them  [66]. For Kaptelinin,  existential HCI tries to 
expand  the  scope  of  HCI  to  understanding  the  most 
personal  uses  of  technology  [52].  So  Kaptelinin  defined 
existential HCI as: 

Existential  HCI  is  a  perspective  in  HCI  research,  which  is 
concerned  with 
investigating  possible  effects  of  digital 
technologies on human experience of existential issues, as well 
as  identifying  potential  uses  of  interactive  technology  to 
support individuals in dealing with existential questions. [52] 

Light’s  commentary  proposed  to  understand  human-
technology  relationships  as  defining  humans  as  groups, 
  Existential  HCI  studies 
individuals,  and  societies. 
“redefining  of  human  experience 
increasingly 
(digitally) technologized and mediatized environment” [67].  

in  an 

In  discussing  existential  crises  and  design,  Light  et  al. 
[68,69]  criticized  what  they  considered  as  “institutional 
humiliation,”  including  prioritizing  system  efficiency  over 
sensitivity;  techno-paternalism;  collection  and  analysis  of 
personal data that dominate decision making; and addictive 
online  content  such  as  gambling  and  shopping  [68].  In 
many  ways,  discussion  of  such  institutional  humiliation 
inspires  us  to  explore  possible  actions  and  turn  to 
Foucault’s care of the self. 

3.2  A Political Economy Perspective in HCI 

In tracing the self in its relation to technologies, we are also 
concerned  with  how  ordinary  individuals  labor  in  their 
interactions  with  complex  systems.  Therefore,  we  turn  to 
the work on the political economy of technologies.  

In  contrast  to  those  framing  the  Internet  as  a  site  of 
resistance,  Terranova  sees 
it  as  a  mutation  totally 
immanent  to  late  capitalism.    For  example,  the  voluntary 
work  that  people  perform,  such  as  moderating  online 
forums  and  content  production,  is    “free  labor”  subject  to 
capitalist  exploitation  [94].  More  recent  approaches 
examine  how  platforms  harvest  and  commodify  user  data 
for  the  accumulation  of  capital  [40,89].  The  combined 
themes  that  “technology  pervades  the  most  intimate  parts 
of  our  world”  [66]  and  the  capitalist  rationalities  behind 

everyday  life  technology  are  concerns  we  take  on  as  we 
examine care of the self. 

issues  beyond 

Ekbia  and  Nardi  discussed  how  the  Marxist  political 
economy  could  engender  critical  reflections  upon  larger 
socioeconomic 
self-constrained  HCI 
problems  [22].  A  political  economy  perspective,  they 
argued,  is  important  to  understand  specific  issues  such  as 
changing  labor  relations,  means  of  production,  and  how  a 
digitalized political economy impacts aspects of life such as 
health  and  environment  [22].  Specifically,  for  HCI,  such 
perspectives  mean  that  HCI  researchers  engage  with 
political economy through 1) historicizing, keeping in mind 
that  the  capitalist  system  has  re-invented  itself  along 
technological advances, 2) contextualizing, engaging beyond 
local  context,  and  3)  politicizing,  acknowledging  that 
technologies are inherently political. A 2018 CHI workshop 
critiqued  “the  mainstream  HCI  community[‘s  orientation] 
around neoliberal capitalist visions of a hi-tech future,” and 
called  for  a  systematic  approach  to  the  end  of  capitalism 
and designing to support a post-capitalist world [25]. 

Foucault  was  concerned  with  neoliberalism.  To  him, 
neoliberalism  differs  from  classic  liberalism  in  privileging 
market  freedom  over  state  regulation  [63].  As  such, 
neoliberalism  expects  each  individual  to  be  a  responsible 
subject, and to assume economic rationality in all aspects of 
life  such  as  health,  learning,  employment,  and  governance 
[38].  Therefore,  it  is  even  more  urgent  that  our  analysis 
examines individuals’ capacity for self-care and how this is 
linked to forms of technological and social structure [63]. 

3.3  The Politics of Technology 

technology  and 

Winner’s original work on the politics of artifacts [100] has 
been influential in science and technology studies (STS) and 
many  other  fields  to  critically  examine  the  so-called 
“neutrality”  of 
in 
technology  design.  For  example,  studies  of  infrastructure 
pay  attention  to  the  invisible  work  that  often  goes 
unnoticed  or  not  formally  recognized  [90,91].  Bowker  and 
Star investigated how classification systems might oppress, 
misrepresent, and marginalize certain groups [12]. 

inscribed  values 

technology  could  contribute 

Brey  analyzed  how 
to 
empowerment  and  disempowerment,  as  well  as  possible 
resistance  strategies  through  technology  [14].  Monahan’s 
examination  of 
technologies  of  deception  such  as 
untrustworthy  workplace  thermostats  and  governmental 
collection of mobile phone data warned about “imbalances 
in  power  and  widespread  acquiescence  to  corporate  and 
state  efforts  to  control  individuals,  groups,  and  their  data” 
[76].  

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 4 
 
 
 
 
Recently  researchers  have  started  to  examine  oppression 
and  politics  within  technologies  at  various  scales.  For 
example, platforms such as Reddit, Facebook, and YouTube 
often combine a variety of functions that work together to 
produce  adverse  effects,  such  as  propagation  of  false 
rumors  and  disinformation  [92]  and  generation  of  toxic 
culture  [73].  Others  have  looked  into  algorithms  that 
perpetuate  discrimination  and  bias  [79].  Still  others  asked 
questions about oppression in big data analytics [74,95]. 

4  METHODOLOGY 

We  follow  a  case  study  methodology  [101]  to  explore  the 
notion of care of the self in interactions between people and 
technology. This methodology denotes an empirical inquiry 
that investigates a phenomenon within its real-life context 
especially when the boundaries between phenomenon and 
context  are  blurry,  combining  heterogeneous  data  sources 
such  as  observation  and  interview,  and  prior  development 
of  theoretical  propositions  [101].  Next,  we  explain  the 
conception  of  the  motivation  of  discussing  the  notion  of 
care  of  the  self  in  the  context  of  HCI,  data  collection,  and 
data analysis, in light of reflexivity [87]. 

The idea of writing this paper emerged through discussions 
of  the  authors  who  led  different  projects  but  shared 
common  interests  in  empirical  research  on  the  interplay 
between  agency  and  external  environment.  It  became  our 
common  recognition  that  care  of  the  self  is  a  theme  that 
could  be  traced  in  scenarios  where  interactions  take  place 
and have an effect on people’s inner selves, but we had not 
systematically examined care of the self in the projects. We 
selected  three  projects  whose  contexts  could  complement 
each  other  in  terms  of  populations,  characteristics  of 
technology-mediated governance, and practices of the self. 

In  the  first  project,  Kou  and  Nardi  investigated  how 
Chinese  citizens  used  technology  to  seek  information  and 
develop  political  opinions  in  mainland  China.  Between 
April  2014  and  January  2016,  Kou,  a  native  speaker  of 
Chinese,  conducted  32  semi-structured  interviews  with 
mainland citizens as well as  several months of observation 
of social media discussions around major political events in 
China.  While  the  project  has  concerned  primarily  with 
participants’  attitudes 
their 
strategies  to  obtain  quality  information  (see  [57,58]),  an 
underexplored  angle  was  how  to  theorize  the  complex 
relationship  participants  formulated  with  censorship  in 
terms of what constitutes knowledge of political events and 
knowledge of a censored self. 

towards  censorship  and 

The second project, led by Kou from October 2011 through 
the  present,  is  a  multi-year  ethnographic  study  of  player 
culture in League of Legends (LoL), one of the largest video 
games in the world [84]. LoL is a team-based, session-based 
game. Play is highly competitive and fosters a game culture 
where  many  players  strive  for  ever-higer  rankings  [56]. 
Like other games [1], LoL supports a culture of monitoring 
and  surveillance:  it  publicizes  all  of  its  players’  gameplay 
data  through  APIs.  Consequently,  numerous  third-party 
quantification  tools  emerge  providing  rich  statistics  about 
player  performance,  allowing  players  to  monitor  each 
other’s  performance.  Kou  and  Gui’s  interview  study  with 
LoL players [55] discussed the key role of quantification in 
informing  players  of  their  own  play  and  providing  them 
more  information  about  their  teammates.  Participants 
reported 
problematic 
quantification use such as stress and in-team conflict.  

consequences 

negative 

of 

The  third  project  by  Gui  and  Chen  concerns  individuals’ 
interactions with the U.S. healthcare system. From 2016 to 
2018  they  conducted  30  narrative  interviews  with  27 
mothers,  one  father,  and  two  mother  and  father  dyads  to 
understand how parents of young children interacted with 
the  healthcare  system.  to  obtain  proper  care  for  their 
children  under  age  two  (see  [45,46]).  The  project  revealed 
how  study  participants  encountered  various  breakdowns 
such as misdiagnosis and unexpectedly large bills, how they 
figured  out  workarounds  to  problems,  and  improved  their 
interactions  with  the  healthcare  system.  A 
skills  in 
consistent theme was parents’ constant work on improving 
their own knowledge and expertise. 

With  care  of  the  self  as  our  theoretical  framework,  we 
conducted deductive thematic analysis [13] upon interview 
transcripts and field notes from the three projects. The first 
and  second  authors  each  went  through  data  to  code  for 
forms of power enacted through technology and the ways it 
acts  upon  people,  as  well  as  the  concrete  practices  of  the 
self  and  how  participants  cultivated  these  practices.  The 
granularity  for  data  analysis  ranged  from  a  few  words  to 
paragraphs,  depending  upon  when  an  idea  was  fully 
expressed. After basic codes were assigned, the two coders 
used several rounds of discussions to consolidate codes and 
develop  themes.  We  selected  representative  quotes  when 
presenting findings. 

5 

THREE CASES OF CARE OF THE SELF 

We use these three diverse cases to illustrate the prevalence 
of  care  of  the  self  in  individuals’  negotiation  with  their 
technology-mediated surroundings. The first case examines 
individuals’ critical examination of censorship technologies 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 5 
and  attempts  at  circumvention.  The  second  concerns  how 
individuals  negotiate  with  self-tracking  technologies  in  a 
game  community.  The  third  discusses  struggles  with  a 
healthcare system based on neoliberal values.  

5.1  Panoptic Technologies and Individual Choice 

The  Chinese  government  closely  monitors  all  traditional 
media  such  as  newspapers,  film,  radio,  and  television 
programs.  Internet  censorship,  or  the  “Great  Firewall,”  is 
widely known to be comprehensive, strict, and advanced. It 
employs  numerous  means  at  different  levels,  including 
cyber-attacks targeted at individual activists and dissidents, 
technical  control built  into household routers  and Internet 
servers,  surveillance,  content  deletion,  closure  of  websites, 
paid  commentators,  cyber  security  laws  [72],  and  Internet 
police [65]. To comply, Internet companies in China enforce 
even  stricter  censorship  on  their  own  platforms  to  make 
sure  they  don’t  run  afoul  of  laws  [50,71].  A  social  media 
user in China commonly encounters censorship techniques 
such  as  sudden  removal  of  websites  for  no  reason,  and 
sensitive keywords being forbidden in social media posts or 
online  searches  [71,86].  Our  analysis  considers  this 
expansive  censorship  apparatus  as  a  set  of  panoptic 
technologies, and explores whether and how care of the self 
is exercised. 

technologies 

5.1.1  Panoptic  Technologies.  The  expansive  censorship  in 
China  manifests  state  power  domination  over  citizens.  It 
establishes  and  enforces  rules  and  constraints  for  use  of 
traditional  media  and  digital 
to  seek 
information  about  public  or  political  events.  It  resembles 
the panopticon in Foucault’s analysis [28] in that it seeks to 
create a disciplinary society whose members are reminded 
that  they  are  being  watched.  In  doing  so,  it  sustains  a 
knowledge  basis  for  establishing  a  version  of  truth  that  it 
accepts, for propagating values and logics aligning with its 
own, and for fending off conflicting ideological viewpoints. 

frequently  experienced 

Our  study  participants 
these 
measures  of  control.  Most  encountered  keyword  blocking 
and  content  deletion  on  social  media  on  a  daily  basis, 
especially  during  political  events  such  as  annual  meetings 
of  the  legislature,  where  online  discussions  of  particular 
members  are  strictly  forbidden.  A  participant  expressed  a 
constant  fear  that  “we  are  mostly  fine  but  who  knows  if 
someday  you  will  be  reported  for  something  you  write 
online and a policeperson knocks on your door.” 

The  agenda  of  censorship,  according  to  one  participant,  is 
to depict a picture that “our country is doing extremely well 
and  the  party  is  very  responsible  for  its  people.”  Foucault 
used  “regime  of  truth”  to  stress  that  each  society  has  its 

own game of truth that builds upon acceptable discourses, 
mechanisms  to  distinguish  what  is  true  or  false,  and 
techniques  for  according  value  [29].  In  this  regard, 
censorship  helps  the  government  to  sustain  a  version  of 
truth  about  itself,  setting  up  expectations  and  perceptions 
of the citizens. 

5.1.2 Individual Choice. Participants  perceived  the  totalizing 
effect  of  censorship  and  the  fear  it  engenders.  However, 
with  awareness  and  tech-savviness,  they  explained  how 
they  could  make  individual  choices  at  two  interrelated 
levels:  their  concern  for  truth  and  their  relationship  with 
digital  technologies.  First,  they  were  cautious  when 
interacting  with  digital  technologies,  knowing  that  they 
certainly  contained  a  censorship  component.  Therefore, 
they knew they could not rely upon one single technology 
(e.g.,  a  single  social  media  platform),  because  each 
technology  entailed  a  certain  combination  of  corporate 
values  and  state  propaganda.  For  example,  one  participant 
criticized  Weibo,  the  largest  microblogging  service  in 
China,  for  “heavy  editing”  and  “allowing  purchase  of  a 
position  in  trending  topics.”  Therefore,  when  participants 
wanted to better understand a specific political event, they 
needed  to  examine  and  understand  their  relations  with 
their surrounding immediately accessible technologies, and 
use such knowledge to reconfigure their own technological 
paths to a more comprehensive set of information. 

reconfiguring.  First, 

they  could  diversify 

To achieve this, participants mentioned a number of means 
their 
of 
information  sources  beyond  domestic  ones  to  include  a 
number  of  foreign  news  websites  and  social  media 
platforms  to  compare  and  synthesize  different  narratives 
and  viewpoints.  Second,  they  could  rely  upon  a  specific 
order  of  technologies  to  circumvent  censorship.  For 
example, many participants mentioned using virtual private 
network  software  to  access  Twitter  and  Facebook.  which 
are blocked in China. Lastly, participants perceived private 
communication  channels  such  as  instant  messaging  and 
email  as  more  secure,  and  use  them  to  share  sensitive 
information with others. One of our participants asked her 
friend who studied abroad to forward sensitive information 
through  email.  This  list  of  ways  of  reconfiguration  is  not 
meant  to  be  exhaustive,  but  to  suggest  that,  while  the 
panoptic  measures  were  implemented  on  a  number  of 
individual  platforms  and  tools,  participants  could  still 
devise  combinations of technologies and people in specific 
orders  to  obtain  desired  information  for  the  purpose  of 
cultivating  their  own  knowledge.  Through  this  recurrent 
reconfiguration, 
use  of 
participants grew competence in technology use. 

technologies  and 

creative 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 6 
 
 
 
 
Participants  were  aware  that  all  the  information  that  they 
had  direct  access  to  was  likely  to  have  been  deliberately 
tailored  to  sustain  a  certain  truth.  They  had  to  decide 
whether the endeavor to rediscover truth in line with their 
own  views  was  worth  the  effort.  The  reconfiguration  of 
technological  paths  took  a  lot  of  time,  and  participants 
could  not  spend  all 
time  pursuing  a  better 
understanding  of  every  single  event.  For  topics  that  they 
were  not  interested  in,  they  remained  suspicious  of 
domestic  narratives  and  acknowledged 
limited 
knowledge of them. 

their 

their 

5.1.3 Summary. In  this  case,  care  of  the  self  manifested  as 
participants’  individual  choices,  where  they  exercised  a 
degree  of  freedom  even  in  such  THE  stringent  power 
structure of heavy censorship. Through various practices of 
the self, participants sought to reject the normalizing effect 
of the censorship apparatus, and cautiously negotiated their 
relations  with  censorship  technologies.  They  exerted  their 
agency to constitute selves as reflexive, careful, and creative 
individuals who did not simply accept logics of censorship 
and government narratives. 

5.2  Culture of Quantification and Self-Reflexivity 

In  the  second  case,  we  move  away  from  the  totalizing, 
inescapable  panoptic  technologies,  to  discuss  an  online 
culture that is largely constrained to a game community. In 
this  case  study,  we  analyze  players’  relations  with 
quantification tools in LoL (Figure 1 shows a screenshot of a 
player’s quantified performance). 

5.2.1  Culture  of  Quantification.  According 
to  our 
participants,  they  relied  upon  quantification  to  track  the 
performance of their own and their friends’. Because LoL is 
a  team-based  game,  participants  also  monitored  their 
teammates’  performance  data  so  as  to  increase  their  win 
chance. For example, they would ask their teammates to 

select characters1 which they had satisfactory performance 
data  with,  and  to  avoid  ones  with  poor  data.  In  this  way, 
LoL,  quantification  tools,  and  the  player  community 
constitute 
culture  of  quantification. 
Governance here refers to all the social and technical means 
such  as  institutions,  technologies,  norms,  and  regulations, 
through which the subjects are governed (see [39]). 

a  networked 

Quantification  disciplines  players,  relying  upon  both 
technical  means,  as  well  as  social  surveillance  to  establish 
an ideal player with satisfactory performance data. As one 
participant said, “you are a bad player simply because your 
KDA2 is  bad.”  The  culture  of  quantification  thus  sustains 
the discourse of performance that judges each player based 
on their publicized data.  

Several  other  participants  described  how  they  used 
quantification tools to scrutinize and evaluate their in-game 
teammates even before their teamwork started. Participants 
told us they would attempt to persuade their teammates to 
adopt  a  certain  playstyle  after  reading  their  quantified 
profiles, to increase chances of winning. 

the  self.  Participants  embraced 

5.2.2 Self-Reflexivity. We found two general practices of care 
of 
the  utilities  of 
quantification,  and  derived  pride  and  meanings  from 
quantification.  Bardzell  et  al.  found  the  power  and 
governance in Second Life was productive in the enactment 
of care of the self in the sense that users made the informed 
and  self-conscious  decision  to  enter,  discovered  new 
feelings  and  experiences,  and 
initiated  progressive 
consideration  that  demands  change  on  the  self  [5].  Our 
participants used quantification to trace their progression in 
LoL,  and  to  analyze  their  performance  to  inform  future 
play. As one participant said, “It helps me know my areas to 
improve…  and  climb  [in]  ranked  [game  mode].”  As  this 
player  explained,  he  was  not 
the  subject  of 
quantification,  being  measured  and  assessed.  He  used 
language  in  positive  terms  to  stress  how  quantification 
“helps” and how he  could obtain  knowledge of himself. In 
this way, he could improve, transform himself into a more 
skilled player. Climbing ranked, the common goal for many 
LoL players in this competitive game culture, was narrated 
as  this  player’s  goal,  manifesting  how  the  player’s 
discovery of the self also includes active acquisition of the 
values of the game culture. 

just 

Figure 1. Quantified Performance in LoL. 

However,  participants  grew  wary  about  the  prevalent  use 
of  quantification  and  the  negative  consequences  it  might 

1 Each  in-game  character  has  a  different  skill  set  and  requires  experiences  and 
practices to play well. 
2 KDA is short for kill/death/assist ratio. 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 7 
 
                                                                 
entail.  Some  participants  expressed  discomfort  with  being 
under  involuntary  monitoring.  Their  teammates  verbally 
harassed  them  for  trying  out  new  characters  or  for  poor 
performance in comparison to their previous match history. 
Other  participants  talked  about  the  distress  and  anxiety 
associated with quantification. One participant said that “iI 
gives me anxiety knowing that my rank will drop.” Anxiety 
could  be  viewed  as  the  affective  underside  of  power  and 
discourse  [78].  Quantification  as  a  culture  produced  and 
reproduced  power  over  players,  some  of  whom  in  turn 
experienced  a  sense  of  powerlessness,  and  became  acutely 
aware  of  their  “problematic”  relations  with  quantification, 
cognitively and emotionally. 

Conscious, reflexive players recognized their own cognitive 
and  emotional  capacity  in  coping  with  quantification-
related  pressure,  and  negotiated  their  relations  with 
quantification. For  example, one  participant told  us that “I 
had  issues  with  them…I  became  upset  when  a  game  hurt 
my kda… now I stay away from them to keep my sanity.” A 
second  participant  mentioned  that  “I  only  use  op.gg  for 
promos.”  Op.gg  is a popular quantification tool in the LoL 
community, and promo refers to promotion matches where 
winning the majority promotes player to a higher rank. 

Participants  had  developed  different  strategies  for  using 
quantification,  ranging  from  nonuse  to  selective  use  to 
frequent use. What was unanimous across all of them was 
their diligence in observing their selves under the influence 
taking  actions.  Self-
of 
transformation in this context denotes individual endeavors 
in  adjusting  the  perceived  problematic  relations  with 
quantification, and to attain a better mode of being in terms 
of happiness and enjoyment of game. 

the  cultural  values  and 

5.2.3 Summary.  To  Foucault,  power  is  neither  positive  nor 
negative,  but  dangerous  [32].  Therefore,  individuals  must 
be concerned with and interrogate power, instead of merely 
being  a  passive  subject. 
In  the  gaming  culture  of 
quantification,  participants  took  care  of  themselves  by 
cautiously adopting quantification and carefully examining 
their relations with quantification. Their constitution of the 
self  encompassed  both  appropriation  of  a  culture  that 
privileges  performance,  rank,  and  competition,  and 
cultivation  of 
individualistic  way  of  using 
quantification. 

their 

5.3  The Neoliberal Healthcare System and Self-

Learning 

In this case, we look at systems that represent a totality of 
techniques,  people,  practices,  and  institutions.  Healthcare 
systems  in  the  U.S.  are  fragmented,  lacking  coordination 

between  resources  and  organizations  [24].  Patients  and 
caregivers must carry out many kinds of invisible work to 
ensure  proper  healthcare  delivery  [82,97].  This  situation 
can  be  partially  traced  to  s  neoliberal  paradigm  in  which 
individual patients  are rational actors responsible for their 
own health conditions and healthcare [42,70]. Our analysis 
starts from an examination of the work that patients carried 
out and the knowledge they sought  to obtain proper care. 

5.3.1 The Neoliberal Healthcare System.  Participants  had  to 
perform  coordination  work  to  connect  poorly  coordinated 
organizations, such as their employer, insurance company, 
pharmacy,  and  hospital.  For  example,  they  need  to 
coordinate  with  their  employer’s  human  resources  office, 
insurance  company,  and  hospital  to  make  sure  their 
employee health benefits could over their newborn babies. 
They performed negotiation work with service providers to 
obtain  affordable,  high  quality  services.  They  performed 
complex informational work to identify a proper course of 
action in dealing with service providers when breakdowns 
happened, e.g., when bills were calculated wrong.   

The  healthcare  system  disciplined  our  participants  into 
acting  as  obedient  workers.  Often  the  bill  was  a  primary 
instrument  of  coercion.  One  participant  said,  “They  [a 
medical  group]  were  constantly  sending  us  bills…the  bills 
are  very  high.  And  the  issue  was  I  had  to  be  the  one 
constantly calling them, telling them that the insurance that 
they're billing is incorrect…  for about fifteen months back 
and  forth.”  In  prison  systems  that  Foucault  studied  [28], 
rules  and  constraints  are  visible  and  clear,  disciplining 
people 
In 
healthcare, coercion through billing was effected through a 
web  of  institutions  such  as  debt  collection  and  credit 
history services which ensured that patients and caregivers 
were forced to be responsible for errors and mistakes that 
originated from within the healthcare organizations. 

instructions  and  punishments. 

through 

Acts of coercion have a normalizing effect. One participant 
said that, “Everything relies on one’s own effort to search, 
to  understand....  I  guess  that’s  just  how  it  works.”  By 
accepting their invisible work for the healthcare industry as 
normal, the participant was subjected to the neoliberal logic 
and  its  further  developments  that  count  on  patients  and 
caregivers to take upon more responsibility. 

The  healthcare  system  was  an  opaque  and  dysfunctional 
one  where  breakdowns  frequently  happened  at  different 
scales  [45],  with  causes 
that  were  unknowable  to 
participants.  Our  participants  observed  that  breakdowns 
could result from errors of many kinds, miscommunication 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 8 
 
 
 
 
across  multiple  departments  of  one  organization  or  failed 
coordination across multiple organizations.  

5.3.2  Self-Learning.  Our  participants  faced  tremendous 
difficulties in making sense of an opaque healthcare system 
with  invisible  rules  and  practices.  Participants  recognized 
that they must take initiative in fixing breakdowns, or they 
would be the ones to suffer.  They thus sought  to discover 
knowledge  about  the  healthcare  system.  They  would 
carefully  ask  questions  of  staff  members  regarding 
procedures  and  policies.  Even  with  this  knowledge,  more 
was  needed  and  had  to  be  obtained  through  connections 
with  a  larger  network  of  resources.  For  instance,  our 
participants mentioned that they compared the websites of 
various  healthcare  providers’  websites  to  learn  whether 
their own provider had outdated information. They checked 
reviews of doctors and facilities on websites like Yelp. They 
consulted  medical  journals  to  check  a  doctor’s  diagnosis 
and  medical  suggestions.  They  gathered  experiential 
knowledge  from  other  parents  on  social  media.  For 
example,  they  learned  that  certain  bills  were  negotiable  if 
they told the healthcare providers they did not have health 
insurance or could not afford the co-pay. 

Participants  discussed  the  importance  of  self-reflection  in 
learning.  Whenever  breakdown  took  place,  they  reflected 
upon what  they already  knew, and what else  they needed 
to know so that such breakdowns would not happen again. 
For  example,  in  the  U.S.,  in-network  means  healthcare 
providers  have  contracts  with  insurance  companies,  and 
consumers  can  pay  much  less.  Out-of-network  means  no 
contract and consumers have to pay the full amount out of 
their own pocket. It is common that a medical facility is in-
network  but  that  certain  specialists,  such  as  pathologists, 
are  out-of-network.  However,  patients  are  not  necessarily 
aware  of  this  nuance,  and  because  of  this,  a  substantial 
portion  of  emergency  room  visits  could  lead  to  high  bills 
[41].  Our  participants  learned  about  this  knowledge  from 
their  own  unexpected  bills  as  well  as  others’  experiences 
shared on social media. They knew they must be attentive 
to  any  service  or  interaction  that  they  would  have  in 
medical facilities. One participant mentioned that when her 
doctor said she would need an ultrasound, she asked, “Is the 
radiologist in-network?” 

5.3.3  Summary.  In  the  neoliberal  system  of  healthcare, 
parents  and  caregivers  were  embedded 
in  a  power 
arrangement  that they  could  not escape and must manage 
so  the  system  remained  functional  for  them  and  their 
families.  Although  parents’  primary  concern  was  their 
children,  rather  than  themselves,  we  argue  that  their 
actions are a form of care of the self. Care of the self entails 

care  of  others  as  a  person  recognizes  their  rightful  social 
role  in  their  family,  community,  and  society,  according  to 
Foucault  [32].  Taking  actions  on  behalf  of  their  children 
demonstrated  participants’  continuous  work  on  renewing 
their knowledge of the healthcare system, or mastery over 
the self. 

6  DISCUSSION 

We used three cases to illustrate care of the self across the 
diverse  contexts  of  a  highly  censored  media  environment, 
gaming culture, and healthcare. The central theme was that 
people  individually  carried  out  constant  examinations  of 
the self as well as their relations to their surroundings. Care 
of the self, as Foucault noted [32], reflects people’s concern 
for  the  truth,  or  knowledge  of  the  self.  Participants’ 
practices  of  the  self  reflected  their  acute  awareness  of  the 
predicaments in a network of power relations and their will 
to  self-transformation  in  order  to  obtain  a  better  mode  of 
being. Care of the self could  appear primarily as proactive 
in  the  case  of  circumventing  censorship,  reflexive  in  the 
culture of quantification, or reactive, evident in the doings 
of  patients  and  caregivers  enmeshed 
in  a  complex 
healthcare system. 

Building on prior discussion of the literature as well as the 
three  case  studies,  we  now  move  to  close  examination  of 
human-technology  relationship,  and  the  implications  of 
care of the self for HCI research and design. 

6.1  Constitution of the Self through Negotiating 

with Technology 

According  to  Ellul  [23],  digital  technologies,  institutions, 
and organizations are all forms of technique that represent 
gradually  revised  and  refined  systematic,  rational,  and 
efficient  means  of  problem  solving,  very  much  in  a 
modernist  sense.  In  sustainable  HCI,  researchers  have 
already  reflected  upon  how  the  modernist  orientation  of 
persuasive  technologies  reduces  design  possibilities  in 
terms of scoping problem too narrowly, focusing too much 
on 
lived 
individuals,  assuming  rationality,  neglecting 
experience,  and  imposing  short-term  time  frames  [16]. 
Technology  is  not  necessarily  neutral  nor  does  it  always 
serve human well-being [68]. Our three cases demonstrated 
how  people  wrestled  with  technologies  exactly  because  of 
efficiency, 
technological  developments 
systematicness,  and  rationality.  In  the  case  of  censorship, 
technologies  were  used  for  maximizing  efficiency  at 
control,  and  participants  needed  to  find  workarounds.  In 
the gaming case, a culture of prioritizing performance and 
play  efficiency  was  developed,  and  participants  had  to 

centered  on 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 9 
adjust their own engagements with the game. In healthcare, 
people  encountered  a  “too-big-to-fail”  neoliberal  system 
[48,75]  sophisticated  at  self-preservation  and  deflection  of 
responsibilities onto individual patients and caregivers,. 

What  technology  creates,  in  our  three  cases,  is  a  form  of 
existential crisis [68]. Participants were entangled with the 
technologies and it was legitimate for them to question the 
meaning of such entanglement: Why do I have to spend so 
much  time  just  to  bypass  censorship?  Why  do  I  care  so 
much about the numbers provided by quantification? Why 
do  I  have  to  do  so  much  work  just  to  take  care  of  my 
children? 

What is technology in relation to the self, then? Ulrich Beck 
said we are in late modernity now, which means all the old 
social institutions that create meaning, such as villages and 
the Church in traditional societies, no longer do so  [9]. To 
create  meaning,  we  are  “condemned  to  individualization,” 
taking responsibility, making  choices, and responding  to  a 
rapidly shifting environment. Digital technologies displaced 
existing  social  structures  with  networks  and  flows.  Our 
participants  were  indeed  individualized  into  finding  their 
own  meanings  through  interactions  with  technologies. 
However,  they  were  also  compelled  to  generate  meanings 
about  their  own  selves  with  the  presence  of  powerful 
entities—government, community, and system. These were 
all  systems  of  governance  that  our  participants  were 
subjected  to  and  transformed  by.  To  some  extent,  as 
modern  individuals,  we  are  condemned  to  take  care  of 
ourselves,  because  no  other  external  agents  or  structures 
can or will. 

Technology  does  not  just  mediate  power  relations,  it  is 
itself a form of power that disciplines the self. Participants 
ascribed  authority  to  technology,  be  it  the  reliance  on 
technological  paths  to  circumvent  censorship  or  trust  in 
quantification to assess the self. Max Weber considered that 
authority  legitimatized  power  without  either  coercion  or 
threat  of  violence  [99].  When 
technology  assumed 
authority  from  participants,  they  were  subjected  to  and 
changed  by  the  authority.  Therefore,  wary  participants 
engaged in constant negotiation with technology, what we 
considered practices of self. 

The  starting  point  of  practices  of  self  was  participants’ 
concern  for  truth.  They  first  became  critical  and  reflective 
on the problematics of the status quo structure. Then they 
could carry out various actions on rediscovering knowledge 
about  their  own  selves  and  their  surroundings.  Their 
actions  varied  along  several  dimensions.  First,  they  could 
initiate diverse ways and degrees of use and “non-use” [8]. 

For  example,  in  the  censorship  case,  participants  stressed 
that they prioritized their interest and time, and would not 
try to do comprehensive information search for any single 
political  topic.  In  the  quantification  case,  participants 
wanted to sustain their wellbeing and the actual purpose of 
playing  games,  and  thus  chose  to  use  quantification  tools 
selectively.  Second, 
learn  strengths  and 
they  could 
weakness  of  each  technology,  and  skillfully  stitch  them 
together for a single purpose [57]. In this way, they did not 
need  to  rely  upon  the  design  of  any  single  technology. 
Third, care of the self entails care of others in the sense of a 
person  would  identify  their  proper  relations  with  other 
people.  Care  for  others  could  be  manifested  as  sharing 
sensitive  information  with  other  people  in  the  censorship 
case, or taking care of their children in the healthcare case. 

6.2  Turn to the Self in HCI 

Mainstream  HCI  has  prioritized  technical  transformation, 
i.e., novel technologies, and social transformation, i.e., how 
to  effect  positive  social  changes.  Ideas  driving  these 
transformations  mostly  operate  at  the  structural  level, 
focusing  intensively  on  the  environment  external  to  the 
self, while paying little attention to self-transformation. We 
emphasize  that  any  technology,  even  if  designed  with 
sound  intentions  and  a  noble  agenda,  is  itself  a  source  of 
disciplinary  power.  Therefore,  discussions  of  structural 
transformations  need  to  involve  considerations  of  self-
transformation, and vice versa. 

Care  of  the  self  must  precede  care  of  others  (i.e.,  other 
people or technologies) in the sense that a person must be 
mindful of their own knowledge, strengths and limits, and 
engage in a constant reexamination of the self, before they 
can  productively  contribute  to  acts  of  care  of  others  in 
terms  of  initiating  structural  changes.  HCI  already  has  a 
few  topical  areas  focused  on  the  self,  such  as  self-
enhancement  [18,102]  and  self-tracking  [64].  But  it  would 
be deterministic to assume that designed technology would 
certainly  empower  self.  Our  study  of  quantification  [55] 
shows  that  tools  intended  to  measure  player  performance 
could  discipline  players,  and  in  some  cases,  do  harm.  The 
focus on self should not be limited to topical areas such as 
self-tracking and health. A self dimension exists in most, if 
technology  under 
not  all,  HCI  projects.  For  any 
the 
examination,  researchers  can  always  ask  how 
technology plays a role in people’s view of and work on the 
self. 

Foucault  foregrounded  the  importance  of  practice  in 
constructing  the  self  by  noting  that  when  he  talked  about 
care  of  the  self,  it’s  always  practices  of  the  self  [32]. 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 10 
 
 
 
 
is  especially 

Therefore, to study the self is to study practices of the self. 
This  is  similar  to  Kuutti  and  Bannon’s  call  for  the  turn  to 
practice in HCI, locating the origin of the social in practices 
[61]. In practical terms, we should examine what practices 
people  perform  to  cultivate  selves  to  achieve  self-
transformation.  However,  we  also  share  Kaptelinin’s 
concern that detailed empirical studies of situated, real-life 
processes  can  be  insufficient  in  discovering  very  personal 
choices  and  experiences  such  as  the  meaning  of  one’s  life 
[52].  This 
true  when  people  exercise 
individualistic  practices  of  care  of  the  self  and  thus 
constantly ask  existential questions about the meanings of 
their actions and technological engagements. While Kuutti 
and  Bannon  stressed  that  “practices  are  a  shared  resource 
among  a  community  of  people”  [61],  what  we  are 
concerned  with  is  the  individualistic  aspect  of  practices  of 
the  self  that  pertain  to  different  individuals’  internal 
properties  such  as  capacity,  mentality,  and  reflexivity.  In 
certain  ways,  a  few  HCI  research  methods  such  as 
interviews  allow  the  opportunity  to  engage  in  dialogues 
with participants, where “contemplation of self and care of 
self  are  related  dialectically”  [33].  The  goal 
is  not 
necessarily  to  discover  a  true,  static  state  of  participants, 
but  to  work  together,  reflexively  and  introspectively,  to 
explore critical aspects about the self and meaning-making, 
such  as  existential  questions  like  “who  am  I?”  and  critical 
questions such as “do you take care of yourself?” 

6.3  Why Foucault and His Care of the Self? 

Bardzell  encouraged  researchers  to  reflect  upon  why  HCI 
would  benefit  from  a  particular  theory  they  propose  [3]. 
We could provide several points to justify the relevance of 
the  notion  of  care  of  the  self  to  HCI.  Foucault  has  been 
influential for his writings on power relation and structures 
that discipline people, which have already taken root in the 
HCI  literature  [51,83].  Foucault’s  analysis  of  power  is 
always linked to his central concern on the self [32,33]. This 
rationale  resonates  with  the  concern  we  expressed  at  the 
beginning  of  the  paper  about  how  the 
increasingly 
powerful  technology  alters the dynamics between self and 
networks of power relations. 

Foucault  was  concerned  with  how  in  the  modern  world, 
knowledge  of  oneself,  or  “know  yourself,”  obscures  “take 
care of yourself” [33]. To him, “take care of yourself” starts 
with concern for the self, which, in our three cases, meant 
participants’  awareness  of  the  power  that  permeates 
technology.  This  awareness  was  the  starting  point  they 
to  discover  knowledge  and  negotiate  and 
sought 
renegotiate  relations  with 
technology.  Only  paying 
attention to knowledge of the self would be insufficient to 

articulate,  for  example,  how  mainland  citizens  decided  to 
forgo  knowledge of some events that  they had no  time or 
interest to follow up on, how LoL players tried to distance 
themselves 
them 
knowledge, or how patient and caregivers refused to accept 
consequences incurred by breakdowns. 

from  quantification 

that  supplied 

6.4  Design Implications 

Drawing  from  notions  of  power  relations  and  care  of  the 
self,  we  could  consider  design  as  fundamentally  an  act  of 
establishing  a  source  of  power.  Therefore,  pluralism  in 
design is vital in a design space where only one technology 
is  available.  When  multiple  technologies  coexist  and 
compete,  people  do  not  have  to  rely  on  only  one. 
Technology as a source of power is not inherently positive 
or negative, but epistemically dangerous. Fundamentally, it 
structurally alters the external environment of the self, and 
thus  should  not  go  unnoticed  or  be  taken  for  granted.  In 
this regard, a few design approaches are fruitful in inspiring 
reflections, such as critical design [4] and speculative design 
[2].  These  approaches  seek  to  invite  thoughts  and  incur 
mental effort from people, which might be valuable to  the 
rise of concern for the self. 

clickbait 

We  call  for  more  attention  to  self-transformation  even 
when  the  primary  design  goals  are  social  or  technical 
transformations.  It  would  be  valuable  for  designers  to 
critically  engage  with  their  own  work,  asking  how  the 
intersects  with  self-realization  and  self-
technology 
transformation. Engagement, a popular value celebrated in 
many HCI design efforts, could be hugely problematic. For 
example, 
extremified 
and  polarized 
recommendation  content  on  social  media  are  designed  to 
engage people [96]. Dark patterns in user experience design 
use  knowledge  about  human  behavior  to  manipulate  user 
actions  [43].  Light  et  al.  criticized  bovine  design  that 
encouraged  passivity  and  rote  behavior  [68].  These  design 
patterns could all be successful at engaging  users in terms 
of longer visit time, more purchase actions, and more user-
generated data, and structurally alter external environment 
in ways beyond individuals’ capacity to observe. 

and 

7  CONCLUSION 

We  discussed  Foucault’s  notion  of  care  of  the  self  in 
relation  to  human-computer  interaction  through  three 
cases  of  people  negotiating  and  renegotiating  with 
technology.  This  notion 
is  particularly  relevant  and 
provoking  to  technology  researchers  concerned  with 
the  external  environments,  but 
transformation  of 
inattentive  to  self-transformation.  Self  could  be  arguably 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 11 
more  difficult  to  recognize  or  measure,  compared  to 
external  factors.  Our  three  cases  have  begun  to  show  that 
the  self  always  takes  steps,  even  if  they  are  small  and 
halting, to be unruly and free. Further research is needed to 
structural 
contemplate  ways  of  putting 
transformations into an equilibrium. 

self  and 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We  thank  our  study  participants  for  their  generosity  in 
sharing  opinions  and  experiences  with  us.  We  appreciate 
the  anonymous  reviewers’  constructive  and  insightful 
feedback.

1: 

[4] 

[3] 

[2] 

24, 

REFERENCES 
[1]  Anders  Albrechtslund  and  Lynsey  Dubbeld.  2005.  The  Plays  and 
Arts  of  Surveillance:  Studying  Surveillance  as  Entertainment. 
Surveillance & Society 3, 2/3: 216–221. 
James  Auger.  2013.  Speculative  design:  crafting  the  speculation. 
Digital 
11–35. 
Creativity 
http://doi.org/10.1080/14626268.2013.767276 
Jeffrey  Bardzell.  2016.  A  Dark  Pattern  in  Humanistic  HCI. 
INTERACTIONS.  
Jeffrey  Bardzell  and  Shaowen  Bardzell.  2013.  What  is  “critical” 
about  critical  design?  Proceedings  of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’13,  ACM  Press,  3297–
3306. http://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466451 
Jeffrey  Bardzell,  Shaowen  Bardzell,  Guo  Zhang,  and  Tyler  Pace. 
2014.  The  lonely  raccoon  at  the  ball:  designing  for  intimacy, 
sociability,  and  selfhood.  Proceedings  of  the  32nd  annual  ACM 
conference on Human factors in computing systems  - CHI ’14,  ACM 
Press, 3943–3952. http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557127 
Shaowen  Bardzell.  2010.  Feminist  HCI:  taking  stock  and  outlining 
an  agenda 
for  design.  Proceedings  of  the  28th  international 
conference on Human factors in computing systems  - CHI ’10,  ACM 
Press, 1301–1310. http://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753521 
Shaowen  Bardzell  and  Jeffrey  Bardzell.  2011.  Towards  a  feminist 
HCI methodology: social science, feminism, and HCI. Proceedings of 
the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - 
CHI 
675–684. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979041 

Press, 

ACM 

’11, 

[6] 

[5] 

[7] 

[8]  Eric  P.S.  Baumer,  Phil  Adams,  Vera  D.  Khovanskaya,  et  al.  2013. 
Limiting, leaving, and (re) lapsing: an exploration of facebook non-
use  practices  and  experiences.  Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems  -  CHI  ’13,  ACM  Press, 
3257–3266. http://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2466446 

[9]  Ulrich  Beck.  1992.  Risk  society :  towards  a  new  modernity.  Sage 

Publications. 

[10]  Mark Bevir. 1999. Foucault and Critique: Deploying agency against 
65–84. 

autonomy. 
Political 
http://doi.org/10.1177/0090591799027001004 

Theory 

27, 

1: 

[11]  Timothy  W.  Bickmore,  Laura  M.  Pfeifer,  and  Brian  W.  Jack.  2009. 
Taking  the  time  to  care:  empowering  low  health  literacy  hospital 
patients  with  virtual  nurse  agents.  Proceedings  of  the  27th 
international  conference  on  Human  factors  in  computing  systems  - 
1265–1274. 
CHI 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518891 

Press, 

ACM 

09, 

[12]  Geoffrey C. Bowker and Susan Leigh Star. 2000. Sorting Things Out: 

Classification and Its Consequences. MIT Press. 

[13]  Virginia  Braun  and  Victoria  Clarke.  2006.  Using  thematic  analysis 
in  psychology.  Qualitative  Research  in  Psychology  3,  2:  77–101. 
http://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa 

[14]  Philip Brey. 2008. The Technological Construction of Social Power. 
71–95. 

22, 

Social 
Epistemology 
http://doi.org/10.1080/02691720701773551 

1: 

[15]  Deana  Brown,  Victoria  Ayo,  and  Rebecca  E.  Grinter.  2014. 
Reflection  through  design:  immigrant  women’s  self-reflection  on 
managing  health  and  wellness.  Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM 

conference on Human factors in computing systems  - CHI ’14,  ACM 
Press, 1605–1614. http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557119 

[16]  Hronn Brynjarsdottir, Maria Håkansson, James Pierce, Eric Baumer, 
Carl  DiSalvo,  and Phoebe  Sengers.  2012.  Sustainably  unpersuaded: 
how persuasion narrows our vision of sustainability.  Proceedings of 
the  2012  ACM  annual  conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing 
Systems 
947–956. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2207676.2208539 

Press, 

ACM 

CHI 

’12, 

- 

[17]  Lawrence  Buell.  1999.  Introduction:  In  Pursuit  of  Ethics.  Papers on 

Language and Literature 114, 1: 7–19. 

[18]  Stefan Parry Carmien and Gerhard Fischer. 2008. Design, adoption, 
and  assessment  of  a  socio-technical  environment  supporting 
independence  for  persons  with  cognitive  disabilities.  Proceeding of 
the  twenty-sixth  annual  CHI  conference  on  Human  factors  in 
computing 
597–606. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357151 

’08,  ACM  Press, 

systems 

-  CHI 

[19]  Steven  Crowell.  2004.  Existentialism.  Stanford  Encyclopedia  of 
from 

Philosophy. 
17, 
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/existentialism/ 

September 

Retrieved 

2018 

[20]  Andrew Dilts. 2011. From 'Entrepreneur of the Self’ to ‘Care of the 
Self’:  Neo-liberal  Governmentality  and  Foucault’s  Ethics.  Foucault 
Studies 0, 12: 130. http://doi.org/10.22439/fs.v0i12.3338 

[21]  Lynn  Dombrowski,  Ellie  Harmon,  and  Sarah  Fox.  2016.  Social 
Justice-Oriented  Interaction  Design.  Proceedings  of  the  2016  ACM 
Conference  on Designing  Interactive  Systems  - DIS  ’16,  ACM  Press, 
656–671. http://doi.org/10.1145/2901790.2901861 

[22]  Hamid  Ekbia  and  Bonnie  Nardi.  2016.  Social  Inequality  and  HCI: 
The  View  from  Political  Economy.  Proceedings  of  the  2016  CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’16,  ACM 
Press, 4997–5002. http://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858343 
[23]  Jacques Ellul. 1964. The Technological Society. Vintage Books. 
[24]  Alain C. Enthoven. 2009. Integrated Delivery Systems: The Cure for 

Fragmentation. American Journal of Managed Care 15, 12. 

[25]  Tom  Feltwell,  Shaun  Lawson, Enrique  Encinas,  et  al.  2018.  “Grand 
Visions” for Post-Capitalist Human-Computer Interaction. Extended 
Abstracts  of  the  2018  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in 
Computing 
1–8. 
Systems 
http://doi.org/10.1145/3170427.3170609 

’18,  ACM 

-  CHI 

Press, 

[26]  Casey  Fiesler  and  Blake  Hallinan.  2018.  “We  Are  the  Product”: 
Public Reactions to Online Data Sharing and Privacy Controversies 
in  the  Media.  Proceedings  of  the  2018  CHI  Conference  on  Human 
Factors  in  Computing  Systems  -  CHI  ’18,  ACM  Press,  1–13. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173627 

[27]  Thomas R. Flynn. 2009. Existentialism. Sterling. 
[28]  Michel  Foucault.  1977.  Discipline  and  Punish:  The  Birth  of  the 

Prison. Vintage Books. 

[29]  Michel  Foucault.  1980.  Truth  and  Power.  In  Power/Knowledge: 
Selected Interviews & Other Writings 1972-1977,  Colin  Gordon  (ed.). 
The Harvester Press. 

[30]  Michel Foucault. 1988. The History of Sexuality, Vol. 3: The Care of 

the Self. Vintage. 

[31]  Michel Foucault. 1990. The History of Sexuality, Vol. 2: The Use of 

Pleasure. Vintage Books. 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 12 
 
 
 
 
 
[32]  Michel  Foucault.  1998.  The  Ethics  of  the  Concern  for  Self  as  a 
Practice  of  Freedom.  In  Ethics:  Subjectivity  and  Truth  (Essential 
Works of Foucault, 1954-1984, Vol. 1),  Paul  Rabinow  (ed.).  The  New 
Press, New York, 281–302. 

[33]  Michel  Foucault.  1998.  Technologies  of  the  self.  In  Ethics: 
Subjectivity  and  Truth  (Essential  Works  of  Foucault,  1954-1984,  Vol. 
1), Paul Rabinow (ed.). The New Press, New York, 223–252. 

[34]  Michel Foucault. 1998. Subjectivity and Truth. In Ethics: Subjectivity 
and  Truth  (Essential  Works  of  Foucault,  1954-1984,  Vol.  1),  Paul 
Rabinow (ed.). The New Press, New York, 87–92. 

[35]  Michel  Foucault.  2001.  Madness  and  Civilization:  A  History  of 

Insanity in the Age of Reason. Psychology Press. 

[36]  Michel Foucault. 2003. The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of 

Medical Perception. Psychology Press. 

[37]  Michel  Foucault.  2003.  Society  must  be  defended :  lectures  at  the 

Collège de France, 1975-76. Picador. 

[38]  Michel  Foucault.  2008.  The birth of biopolitics : lectures at the Collège 

de France, 1978-79. Palgrave Macmillan.  

[39]  Michel  Foucault.  2009.  Security,  territory,  population :  lectures  at 

the Collège de France, 1977-78. Palgrave Macmillan. 

[40]  Christian  Fuchs.  2012.  The  Political  Economy  of  Privacy  on 
139–159. 

Television  &  New  Media 

13, 

2: 

Facebook. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1527476411415699 

[41]  Christopher  Garmon  and  Benjamin  Chartock.  2017.  One  In  Five 
Inpatient  Emergency  Department  Cases  May  Lead  To  Surprise 
177–181. 
Bills. 
http://doi.org/10.1377/hlthaff.2016.0970 

Affairs 

Health 

36, 

1: 

[42]  Stinne Glasdam, Christine Oeye, and Lars Thrysoee. 2015. Patients’ 
participation 
- 
‘projectification’  of  patients  in  a  neoliberal  framed  healthcare 
226–238. 
Nursing 
system. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/nup.12092 

in  decision-making 

the  medical 

Philosophy 

field 

16, 

in 

4: 

[43]  Colin  M.  Gray,  Yubo  Kou,  Bryan  Battles,  Joseph  Hoggatt,  and 
Austin  L.  Toombs.  2018.  The  Dark  (Patterns)  Side  of  UX  Design. 
Proceedings  of  the  2018  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in 
1–14. 
Computing 
http://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174108 

’18,  ACM 

Systems 

-  CHI 

Press, 

[44]  Xinning Gui, Yu Chen, Clara Caldeira, Dan Xiao, and Yunan Chen. 
2017.  When  Fitness  Meets  Social  Networks:  Investigating  Fitness 
Tracking  and  Social  Practices  on  WeRun.  Proceedings of the 2017 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  - CHI ’17, 
ACM Press, 1647–1659. http://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025654 
[45]  Xinning  Gui  and  Yunan  Chen.  2019.  Making  Healthcare 
Infrastructure  Work:  Unpacking  the  Infrastructuring  Work  of 
Individuals. CHI’2019. 

[46]  Xinning Gui, Yunan Chen, and Kathleen H. Pine. 2018. Navigating 
the  Healthcare  Service  “Black  Box”:  Individual  Competence  and 
Fragmented  System.  Proceedings  of the ACM on  Human-Computer 
Interaction (CSCW 2018 second cycle) 2, CSCW: Article 61. 

[47]  Gary  Gutting  and  Johanna  Oksala.  2018.  Michel  Foucault.  The 
(Summer  2018  Edition). 
from 

Stanford  Encyclopedia  of  Philosophy 
Retrieved 
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2018/entries/foucault/ 
[48]  Daniel M Hartung, Dennis N Bourdette, Sharia M Ahmed, and Ruth 
H  Whitham.  2015.  The  cost  of  multiple  sclerosis  drugs  in  the  US 
and the pharmaceutical industry: Too big to fail? Neurology 84, 21: 
2185–92. http://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.0000000000001608 

[49]  AB  Hofmeyr.  2015.  The  Ethics  and  Politics  of  Self-Creation  in 
Foucault.  In  The  Ethics  of  Subjectivity.  Palgrave  Macmillan  UK, 
London, 126–143. http://doi.org/10.1057/9781137472427_8 

[50]  Human Rights Watch. 2013. China: Nationwide Arrests of Activists, 
from 
Critics  Multiply.  Human  Rights  Watch.  Retrieved 

http://www.hrw.org/news/2013/08/30/china-nationwide-arrests-
activists-critics-multiply 

[51]  Lilly C. Irani and M. Six Silberman. 2013. Turkopticon: Interrupting 
Worker  Invisibility  in Amazon Mechanical Turk.  Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,  ACM, 
611–620. http://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2470742 

[52]  Victor  Kaptelinin.  2016.  Making  the  Case  for  an  Existential 
Perspective in HCI Research on Mortality and Death. Proceedings of 
the  2016  CHI  Conference  Extended  Abstracts  on  Human  Factors  in 
Computing  Systems  -  CHI  EA 
’16,  ACM  Press,  352–364. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2851581.2892585 

[53]  Victor  Kaptelinin.  2018.  Technology  and  the  Givens  of  Existence: 
Toward  an  Existential  Inquiry  Framework  in  HCI  Research. 
Proceedings  of  the  2018  CHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in 
Computing 
1–14. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173844 

’18,  ACM 

Systems 

-  CHI 

Press, 

[54]  Yubo  Kou  and  Colin  M.  Gray.  2018.  “What  do  you  recommend  a 
complete  beginner 
like  me  to  practice?”:  Professional  Self-
Disclosure  in  an  Online  Community.  Proceedings of  the  ACM  on 
Human-Computer 
CSCW. 
Interaction 
http://doi.org/10.1145/3274363 

2, 

[55]  Yubo  Kou  and  Xinning  Gui.  2018.  Entangled  with  Numbers: 
Quantified  Self  and  Others  in  a  Team-Based  Online  Game. 
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction  2,  CSCW: 
1–25. http://doi.org/10.1145/3274362 

[56]  Yubo  Kou,  Xinning  Gui,  and  Yong  Ming  Kow.  2016.  Ranking 
Practices  and  Distinction  in  League  of  Legends.  Proceedings of the 
2016  Annual  Symposium  on  Computer-Human  Interaction  in  Play  - 
CHI 
4–9. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2967934.2968078 

Press, 

PLAY 

ACM 

’16, 

[57]  Yubo  Kou  and  Bonnie  Nardi.  2018.  Complex  Mediation  in  the 
Formation  of  Political  Opinions.  Proceedings  of  the  2018  CHI 
Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems    -  CHI  ’18. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174210 

[58]  Yubo  Kou,  Bryan  Semaan,  and  Bonnie  Nardi.  2017.  A  Confucian 
Look at Internet Censorship in China. Human-Computer Interaction 
- INTERACT 2017. http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-67744-6_25 
[59]  Yong  Ming  Kow.  2018.  Digital  Introspection  Within  Learning-on-
my-Own  Rhetoric  Among  Computer  Gamers.  Mind, Culture, and 
Activity 25, 1: 40–52. http://doi.org/10.1080/10749039.2017.1329319 

[60]  Juhi Kulshrestha, Motahhare Eslami, Johnnatan Messias, et al. 2017. 
Quantifying Search Bias: Investigating Sources of Bias for Political 
Searches  in  Social  Media.  Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference 
on  Computer  Supported  Cooperative  Work  and  Social  Computing  - 
CSCW 
417–432. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998321 

Press, 

ACM 

’17, 

[61]  Kari Kuutti and Liam J. Bannon. 2014. The turn to practice in HCI: 
towards  a  research  agenda.  Proceedings  of  the  32nd  annual  ACM 
conference on Human factors in computing systems  - CHI ’14,  ACM 
Press, 3543–3552. http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557111 

[62]  Airi  Lampinen,  Vilma  Lehtinen,  Asko  Lehmuskallio,  and  Sakari 
Tamminen.  2011.  We’re  in  it  together:  interpersonal  management 
of  disclosure  in  social  network  services.  Proceedings  of  the  2011 
annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11, 
ACM Press, 3217–3226. http://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979420 
[63]  Thomas Lemke. 2001. “The birth of bio-politics”: Michel Foucault’s 
lecture  at  the  Collège  de  France  on  neo-liberal  governmentality. 
Economy 
190–207. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/03085140120042271 

Society 

and 

30, 

2: 

[64]  Ian  Li, Anind  Dey, and  Jodi  Forlizzi.  2010. A  stage-based  model  of 
personal  informatics  systems.  Proceedings of the 28th international 
conference on Human factors in computing systems  - CHI ’10,  ACM 
Press, 557–566. http://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753409 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 13 
 
 
[65]  Bin  Liang  and  Hong  Lu.  2010.  Internet  Development,  Censorship, 
and  Cyber  Crimes  in  China.  Journal  of  Contemporary  Criminal 
Justice 26, 1: 103–120. 

[66]  Ann  Light.  2008.  Empirical  vernacular  philosophy,  or  towards  an 
existential  HCI.  HCI  2008 :  British  HCI  Conference :  Workshop  on 
from 
Critical 
https://sites.google.com/site/designcriticism/positi%0Aonstatement
s 

Interaction  Design. 

Retrieved 

Issues 

in 

[67]  Ann  Light.  2016.  Commentary  For  alt.chi  paper  Making  the  Case 
for  an  Existential  Perspective  in  HCI  Research  on  Mortality  and 
Death by Victor Kaptelinin.  

[68]  Ann  Light,  Alison  Powell,  and  Irina  Shklovski.  2017.  Design  for 
Existential  Crisis  in  the  Anthropocene  Age.  Proceedings of the 8th 
International  Conference  on  Communities  and  Technologies    -  C&T 
’17, ACM Press, 270–279. http://doi.org/10.1145/3083671.3083688 
[69]  Ann  Light,  Irina  Shklovski,  and  Alison  Powell.  2017.  Design  for 
Existential  Crisis.  Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended 
Abstracts  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems    -  CHI  EA  ’17, 
ACM Press, 722–734. http://doi.org/10.1145/3027063.3052760 
[70]  Deborah  Lupton.  2014.  Self-tracking  cultures:  towards  a  sociology 
informatics.  Proceedings  of  the  26th  Australian 
of  personal 
Computer-Human  Interaction  Conference  on  Designing  Futures  the 
Future 
77–86. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2686612.2686623 

’14,  ACM 

of  Design 

-  OzCHI 

Press, 

[71]  Rebecca  MacKinnon.  2007.  Flatter  world  and  thicker  walls?  Blogs, 
censorship and civic discourse in China. Public Choice 134, 1–2: 31–
46. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11127-007-9199-0 

[72]  Rebecca MacKinnon. 2011. China’s “Networked Authoritarianism.” 
Journal of Democracy 22, 32–46. http://doi.org/10.1353/jod.2011.0033 
[73]  Adrienne  Massanari.  2017.  #Gamergate  and  The  Fappening:  How 
toxic 
Reddit’s  algorithm,  governance,  and  culture  support 
technocultures.  New  Media  &  Society 
329–346. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1461444815608807 

19, 

3: 

[74]  Jacob Metcalf, Emily F. Keller, and Danah Boyd. 2016. Perspectives 
on  Big  Data,  Ethics,  and  Society. The Council for Big Data, Ethics 
and Society.  

[75]  R. Minhas, C. Wendt, and A. Wierzibicki. 2008. Is healthcare in the 
United  States  too  big  to  fail?  International  Journal  of  Clinical 
Practice 
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1742-
1241.2008.01949.x 

1827–1830. 

12: 

62, 

[76]  Torin  Monahan.  2016.  Built  to  lie:  Investigating  technologies  of 
deception,  surveillance,  and  control.  The Information Society  32,  4: 
229–240. http://doi.org/10.1080/01972243.2016.1177765 

[77]  Michael  J.  Muller  and  Sarah  Kuhn.  1993.  Participatory  design. 
24–28. 

ACM 

36, 

6: 

Communications 
http://doi.org/10.1145/153571.255960 

the 

of 

[78]  Justine  S.  Murison.  2011.  The  Politics  of  Anxiety  in  Nineteenth-

Century American Literature. Cambridge University Press. 

[79]  Safiya Umoja Noble. Algorithms of oppression : how search engines 

reinforce racism. NYU Press. 

[80]  Francisco Nunes and Geraldine Fitzpatrick. 2018. Understanding the 
Mundane  Nature  of  Self-care:  Ethnographic  Accounts  of  People 
Living  with  Parkinson’s.  Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems  - CHI ’18,  ACM  Press,  1–15. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173976 

[81]  Wanda  J.  Orlikowski.  2000.  Using  Technology  and  Constituting 
in 
404–428. 

for  Studying  Technology 
Structures:  A  Practice  Lens 
Organizations. 
Science 
Organization 
http://doi.org/10.1287/orsc.11.4.404.14600 

11, 

4: 

[82]  Nelly Oudshoorn. 2008. Diagnosis at a distance: the invisible work 
of  patients  and  healthcare  professionals  in  cardiac  telemonitoring 
technology.  Sociology  of  Health  & 
Illness  30,  2:  272–288. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9566.2007.01032.x 

[83]  Leysia  Palen  and  Paul  Dourish.  2003.  Unpacking  “privacy”  for  a 
129–136. 

ACM, 

networked 
http://doi.org/10.1145/642611.642635 

world. 

[84]  Matt  Porter.  2016.  League  of  Legends  Surpasses  100  Million 
from 

Monthly 
Retrieved 
http://www.ign.com/articles/2016/09/14/league-of-legends-
surpasses-100-million-monthly-active-players 

ign.com. 

Players. 

Active 

[85]  Stephen  Purpura,  Victoria  Schwanda,  Kaiton  Williams,  William 
Stubler,  and  Phoebe  Sengers.  2011.  Fit4life:  the  design  of  a 
persuasive  technology  promoting  healthy  behavior  and  ideal 
weight.  Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors 
in  computing 
’11,  ACM  Press,  423–432. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1979003 

systems 

-  CHI 

[86]  Adrian  Rauchfleisch  and  Mike  S.  Schäfer.  2014.  Multiple  public 
spheres  of  Weibo:  a  typology  of  forms  and  potentials  of  online 
public  spheres  in  China.  Information, Communication & Society:  1–
17. http://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2014.940364 

[87]  Jennifer  A.  Rode.  2011.  Reflexivity 

in  digital  anthropology. 
Proceedings  of  the  2011  annual  conference  on  Human  factors  in 
computing 
123–132. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1978942.1978961 

’11,  ACM 

-  CHI 

systems 

Press, 

[88]  Hanna Schneider, Malin Eiband, Daniel Ullrich, and Andreas Butz. 
2018. Empowerment in HCI - A Survey and Framework. Proceedings 
of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems  
- CHI ’18, ACM Press, 1–14. http://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173818 

[89]  Nick Srnicek. 2016. Platform capitalism. John Wiley & Sons. 
[90]  Susan  Leigh  Star.  1999.  The  Ethnography  of  Infrastructure. 
377–391. 

43, 

American 
Behavioral 
http://doi.org/10.1177/00027649921955326 

Scientist 

3: 

[91]  Susan  Leigh  Star  and  Karen  Ruhleder.  1996.  Steps  Toward  an 
Ecology of Infrastructure: Design and Access for Large Information 
Spaces. 
111–134. 
Information 
http://doi.org/10.1287/isre.7.1.111 

Systems  Research 

1: 

7, 

[92]  Kate Starbird, Ahmer Arif, Tom Wilson, Katherine Van Koevering, 
Katya Yefimova, and Daniel Scarnecchia. 2018. Ecosystem or Echo-
System?  Exploring  Content  Sharing  across  Alternative  Media 
Domains. ICWSM. 

[93]  Kate  Starbird,  Emma  Spiro,  Isabelle  Edwards,  Kaitlyn  Zhou,  Jim 
Maddock,  and  Sindhuja Narasimhan.  2016.  Could  This  Be  True?: I 
Think  So!  Expressed  Uncertainty  in  Online  Rumoring.  Proceedings 
of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
- 
360–371. 
ACM 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858551 

Press, 

CHI 

’16, 

[94]  Tiziana  Terranova.  2000.  Free  Labor:  Producing  Culture  for  the 

Digital Economy. Social Text, 63 18, 2: 33–58. 

[95]  Zeynep Tufekci. 2013. Big Data: Pitfalls, Methods and Concepts for 
Journal. 

Electronic 

Field. 

SSRN 

Emergent 

an 
http://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2229952 

Times. 

[96]  Zeynep  Tufekci.  2018.  YouTube,  the  Great  Radicalizer.  The New 
from 

York 
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/03/10/opinion/sunday/youtube-
politics-radical.html?rref=collection%2Fcolumn%2Fzeynep-
tufekci&action=click&contentCollection=opinion&region=stream&
module=stream_unit&version=latest&contentPlacement=6&pgtype
=collection 

Retrieved 

[97]  Kenton  T.  Unruh  and  Wanda  Pratt.  2008.  The  Invisible  Work  of 
Being  a  Patient  and  Implications  for  Health  Care:  “[the  doctor  is] 
my  business  partner  in  the  most  important  business  in  my  life, 
Industry  Conference 
staying  alive.”  Ethnographic  Praxis 
Proceedings 
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1559-
2008, 
8918.2008.tb00093.x 

40–50. 

in 

1: 

[98]  Jessica  Vitak  and  Jinyoung  Kim.  2014.  “You  can’t  block  people 
the 

facebook’s  affordances  shape 

offline”:  examining  how 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 14 
 
 
 
 
disclosure  process.  Proceedings  of  the  17th  ACM  conference  on 
Computer  supported  cooperative  work  &  social  computing  -  CSCW 
’14, ACM Press, 461–474. http://doi.org/10.1145/2531602.2531672 
[99]  Max Weber. 1978. Economy and society : an outline of interpretive 

sociology. University of California Press. 

[100]  Langdon  Winner.  1980.  Do  Artifacts  Have  Politics?  Modern 

Technology: Problem or Opportunity 109, 1: 121–136. 

[101]  Robert  K.  Yin.  2009.  Case study research : design and methods.  SAGE 

Publications. 

[102]  John  Zimmerman.  2009.  Designing  for  the  self:  making  products 
that help people become the person they desire to be. Proceedings of 
the  27th  international  conference  on  Human  factors  in  computing 
395–404. 
systems 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.1518765 

Press, 

ACM 

CHI 

09, 

- 

CHI 2019 Paper  CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 481Page 15 
 
