Understanding Personal Productivity
How Knowledge Workers Define, Evaluate, and Reflect on Their Productivity

Young-Ho Kim†
yhkim@hcil.snu.ac.kr

Eun Kyoung Choe∥
choe@umd.edu

Bongshin Lee¶
bongshin@microsoft.com

Jinwook Seo†‡
jseo@snu.ac.kr

†Human-Computer Interaction Lab, Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
∥College of Information Studies & HCIL, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, United States
¶Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, United States
‡Institute of Computer Technology, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea

ABSTRACT
Productivity tracking tools often determine productivity
based on the time interacting with work-related applica-
tions. To deconstruct productivity’s diverse and nebulous
nature, we investigate how knowledge workers conceptu-
alize personal productivity and delimit productive tasks in
both work and non-work contexts. We report a 2-week di-
ary study followed by a semi-structured interview with 24
knowledge workers. Participants captured productive activi-
ties and provided the rationale for why the activities were
assessed to be productive. They reported a wide range of pro-
ductive activities beyond typical desk-bound work—ranging
from having a personal conversation with dad to getting a
haircut. We found six themes that characterize the produc-
tivity assessment—work product, time management, worker’s
state, attitude toward work, impact & benefit, and compound
task—and identified how participants interleaved multiple
facets when assessing their productivity. We discuss how
these findings could inform the design of a comprehensive
productivity tracking system that covers a wide range of
productive activities.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in
HCI.

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights
for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.

CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK
© 2019 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-5970-2/19/05. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300845

KEYWORDS
Productivity; Knowledge worker; Diary study; Self-tracking;
Self-monitoring; Personal informatics; Productivity tracking

ACM Reference Format:
Young-Ho Kim, Eun Kyoung Choe, Bongshin Lee, and Jinwook
Seo. 2019. Understanding Personal Productivity: How Knowledge
Workers Define, Evaluate, and Reflect on Their Productivity. In CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Proceedings
(CHI 2019), May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland UK. ACM, New York,
NY, USA, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3290605.3300845

1 INTRODUCTION
Boosting productivity is important for creative knowledge
workers (e.g., software developers, writers, researchers, de-
signers). Self-tracking of personal productivity is a com-
mon technique to improve productivity [46] because it helps
knowledge workers understand and reflect on how they
spend their time. Productivity tracking technologies have
become proliferated in our everyday life, supporting to track
usage patterns at a device level (e.g., Moment [22], Screen-
Life [44]) as well as an app level (e.g., RescueTime [43],
TimeAware [27], meTime [52]).

Existing productivity tracking tools are usually not de-
signed to capture the diverse and nebulous nature of individ-
ual workers’ activities. Although the specifics of their day-
to-day activities vary, existing technologies track activities
that are easy to capture. For example, automated monitoring
tools such as RescueTime [43] can capture activities that
involve digital devices only, and thus calculate productivity
based on software usage duration. Furthermore, prior stud-
ies often measured productivity (e.g., engagement [27, 55],
performance [19]) within work contexts.

However, we have little knowledge on how people con-
ceptualize personal productivity in both work and non-work
contexts. In understanding personal productivity, consider-
ing both contexts is important: the distinction between work
and non-work contexts has become fuzzy, as work slips into
our lives, and activities in non-work contexts can affect pro-
ductivity. In this work, we investigate what productivity
means for individuals: what activities do knowledge workers

CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 615Page 1consider productive and why? The findings could inform the
design of productivity tracking tools that capture a compre-
hensive range of activities that knowledge workers engage
in, going beyond the traditional measures of device usage
time and app category.

In this paper, we present a diary study on personal pro-
ductivity, collecting the activities that are perceived to be
productive and their subjective productivity level (neutral,
productive, and very productive), as well as individuals’ ratio-
nale. We collected diary entries from 24 knowledge workers
over the course of two weeks (10 weekdays + voluntary
weekends), and conducted a semi-structured interview with
them. Our participants recorded the productivity level of a
wide range of activities, including both work-related and
non-work related ones. From the analysis of diary entries,
we identified six themes that characterize the assessment of
productivity—work product, time management, worker’s state,
attitude toward work, impact & benefit, and compound task.
The key contributions of this work are twofold. First,
we provide an empirical understanding of what knowledge
workers account for when delimiting productivity-related
activities and evaluating their productivity. Second, we of-
fer implications for designing comprehensive productivity
tracking tools that cover a wide range of productive activities.

2 RELATED WORK
Productivity has been of interests to diverse research commu-
nities. We first discuss the characteristics of knowledge work
and traditional productivity metrics from the perspective of
organizational psychology and human-computer interaction.
We then review HCI research on factors influencing produc-
tivity and technologies designed to enhance productivity.

Measuring Knowledge Workers’ Productivity
While there is no single definition of productivity that every-
one agrees upon, productivity is commonly defined as the
ratio of outputs over inputs [39]. In The Industrial Age, mea-
suring productivity of a given person was relatively straight-
forward, as inputs (labor and capital) and outputs (tangible
products) were easy to identify. In Information Age, measur-
ing productivity of knowledge workers is more challenging
than measuring that of traditional factory workers [18] be-
cause outputs are domain-specific and not easily quantifiable,
and inputs are hardly standardized among different knowl-
edge workers [40]. As such, developing performance metrics
for knowledge work and maximizing knowledge worker’s
productivity have been an important topic.

Characteristics of knowledge work are different from those
of traditional factory labor in terms of autonomy, uncertainty,
and abstractness [1, 14, 17, 18]. For the large part of their job,
knowledge workers autonomously choose and schedule their
tasks, which can be assigned at unexpected time. A notion

of creative knowledge work emphasizes the importance of
creative skill sets—such as problem solving, problem seeking,
idea generation, and aesthetic sensibilities [31]. In Reich’s
description, creative workers produce innovative goods in
the knowledge economy [41].

Organizational productivity research has also examined
the factors that influence employee productivity (see [20]
for a review), including organizational factors (e.g., job char-
acteristics [6], feedback [16], autonomy [16, 47], office envi-
ronments [10]), as well as individual factors (e.g., intrinsic
motivation [19], psychological well-being [10, 48, 53], work
engagement [2, 55]). For example, a work environment pro-
moting both autonomy and responsibility is likely to moti-
vate their employees to yield positive work outcomes, such
as work performance and job satisfaction [19].

The HCI community has studied knowledge workers’ pro-
ductivity in their computerized work environments. With
the goal of identifying the source of distraction and inter-
ruption, researchers examined the nature of distractions and
their effects on the work process [4, 12, 13, 23, 33, 34]. For
example, Czerwinski and colleagues examined the nature of
information workers’ task switching, and identified factors—
such as task complexity, task duration, length of absence,
number of interruptions, and task type—that influence the
perceived difficulty of returning to tasks. In a recent study,
Mark and colleagues found that those who reported being
less in control of their work, associated with personality
traits of lower Conscientiousness and Lack of Perseverance,
benefited the most from a system that blocks online distrac-
tions in the workplace [33]. In contrast to the prior approach
of capturing pre-defined productivity metrics, we take an
inductive approach to have a deep understanding on how
knowledge workers conceptualize their productivity in both
work and non-work contexts.

Enhancing Personal Productivity with Self-Tracking
We see a growing body of literature on productivity tracking
technologies designed to help people track their productivity
to improve self-awareness, which could lead to enhanced
productivity [21, 27, 37, 38, 44, 52]. Because information de-
vices (e.g., computers, smartphones) have become an integral
part of people’s work, as well as a source of distraction, many
productivity tracking systems enable people to record device
usage behaviors to provide insights into their usage patterns.
Some systems consider screen time as distractive, thereby
restricting specific apps (e.g., [26]) or locking smartphones
for a specified duration (e.g., [25, 29, 30]) when people need
to focus on their tasks.

These systems predominantly incorporate automated track-
ing, and thus rely on the relatively simple measurements that
can be captured. For example, many of these tools capture the
usage duration of each application (e.g., [21, 27, 32, 43, 52]) or

CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 615Page 2the device (e.g., [44]), and some of them calculate a produc-
tivity score derived from the ratio of productive application
usage to total computer usage [27, 43]. Commercial tools
for developers’ productivity usually track a developer’s pro-
gramming activities such as interactions with the integrated
development environment (e.g., [11, 51]).

Although automated tracking reduces the capture burden
and collects behavioral data with high granularity, this ap-
proach has three main limitations. First, automated tracking
does not capture productive activities that people do without
devices (e.g., ad-hoc meeting). Second, automated tracking
does not always correctly infer a person’s intention of using
applications, websites, or devices. For example, people can
use a video chat application (e.g., Skype, Hangout) or visit an
online shopping site (e.g., Amazon, Ebay) both for work and
for personal purposes. Most importantly, the duration of the
app use is not reflective of a person’s perceived productivity.
For example, working on a Word document for a long time
may not be an indication of productive writing. In this light,
we need to understand how people assess their own produc-
tivity and incorporate them in the design of productivity
tracking systems. We thus set out to collect self-reported
data on activities that are perceived to be productive, along
with contexts and their reasoning through a diary study.

3 DIARY STUDY
Capturing in-situ data on events and experiences is an eco-
logically valid way to understand people’s daily lives. One
commonly used technique is a diary study, a data collection
method with which researchers ask participants to record
a log of their receptiveness or circumstantial information
close to the occurrence of a target situation [3]. To under-
stand how people perceive and evaluate the productivity of
their activities, we conducted a 2-week diary study using a
mobile self-tracking tool followed by an exit interview. The
study was approved by the institutional review board, and
conducted in South Korea.

Clerk

Participant Occupation
46 (M) Professor
P1
29 (M) UI designer
P2
44 (M) CEO
P3
27 (M)
P4
27 (M) Developer
P5
30 (M) Ph.D. student
P6
36 (M) Project manager
P7
26 (M) Developer
P8
P9
28 (M) Researcher
P10 28 (M) Ph.D. student
P11 23 (M) Ph.D. student
P12 30 (M) UI designer

Participant Occupation
P13 37 (F)
P14 32 (F) Medical writer
P15 25 (F)
Interaction designer P16 25 (F)
P17 29 (F)
P18 35 (F)
P19 46 (F)
P20 25 (F)
P21 33 (F)
P22 26 (F)
P23 35 (F)
P24 27 (F)

Clerk
Interaction designer
Project manager
Clerk
Counsellor
Ph.D. student
UI designer
UI designer
Counsellor
Interaction designer

Table 1: Demographics of the participants.

Figure 1: Mandatory fields in Productivity Journal. In this
example, paperwork activity started at 3:20 PM, lasted for 20
minutes, and was evaluated as productive.

Participants
We advertised our study on social media and the alumni com-
munity website of a local university. Our inclusion criteria
were adults who are: (1) working at least for 30 hours per
week for their primary job; (2) not currently participating in
other studies requiring self-reported data collection; (3) not
an undergraduate student; (4) using an Android smartphone
(our diary study tool supported Android only); and (5) inter-
ested in their personal productivity. Of the 48 people who
filled out the screener, we recruited 28 people who met the
criteria. As a minimum requirement for study completion,
we instructed the participants to capture logs for a minimum
of seven (out of ten) weekdays. During the deployment, one
participant dropped out due to a health issue. Additional
three were excluded during the analyses because they did
not meet the minimum logging requirement.

In the end, 24 participants (12 female and 12 male; referred
to as P1-P24; Table 1) completed the study. Their ages ranged
from 23 to 46 (M = 31.20). They reported that they work for
an average of 43.2 hours per week. Eleven occupations were
represented among our participants, and three participants
reported that they had a second job: one was a translator and
the other two were managing their own online stores. We
offered 50,000 KRW (about 45 USD) for their participation.

Study Instrument for Data Capture
We instructed participants to record the activities that they
considered to be better than “unproductive” (i.e., neutral,
productive, and very productive) in both work and non-work

Context information fields (optional)CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 615Page 3contexts. To identify what constitutes productivity induc-
tively, We encouraged participants to freely define their own
productivity, including the activity type and granularity, and
rate the level of productivity. We did not ask to capture un-
productive activities because (1) we were mainly interested
in what activities are considered productive and why, and (2)
we wanted to lower the capture burden. In addition, logging
only positive tasks can be rewarding and thus help us further
ensure adherence [45].

We deployed a mobile diary, called “Productivity Journal”
(Figure 1). We created the diary app with OmniTrack [28],
a mobile self-tracking platform that enables the creation
of a tracking app by configuring an input schema and re-
minders on a mobile phone. For each productive activity, we
wanted to capture the time stamp and duration of the activity,
task details (e.g., paperwork, email, brainstorming, meeting),
perceived productivity level (i.e., neutral, productive, very
productive), and rationale for the productivity assessment
(e.g., why a certain activity was rated “very productive”). We
also included optional fields to cover contextual information
such as devices used for the task, location, mood, and photo.
In the mobile app, participants could review their entries
through a list and access simple visualizations (e.g., a daily
entry count). A shortcut button on the smartphone’s notifica-
tion drawer and lock screen enabled participants to open the
entry input screen instantly, and served as a visual reminder
to enhance tracking adherence [8]. Details of the mobile app
UI are described in [28].

In addition to Productivity Journal, we deployed another
journal (called “Skip Journal”) so that participants can report
reasons when they did not capture any productive activities
during the day (e.g., too busy to capture productive activities,
did not do any productive activities). At 9:00 p.m. every week-
day, the Skip Journal app sent a notification to participants
if they did not log an entry in either of the two journals.

Procedure
Participants attended an hour-long pre-study session in a
small group (2–4 participants), during which we explained
our study goal and protocol. After installing the two diary
apps (Productivity Journal & Skip Journal) on their smart-
phones, we gave a short tutorial on how to record and man-
age the journal entries. We instructed the participants to
record the journals for two weeks (10 mandatory weekdays
and 4 voluntary days in weekends). We emphasized that
the number of journal entries is not tied to the study com-
pensation. Starting a day after the pre-study session, the
journal entries were uploaded to our server when partici-
pants’ smartphones were connected to the network.

After two weeks, we met each participant individually for
a debriefing session, which comprises a semi-structured in-
terview and another activity that is outside the scope of this

investigation (we do not report the data from this activity
here). Each session lasted about one and a half hours, and was
audio-recorded and transcribed. We asked questions regard-
ing their logging contexts (e.g., “In what situation did you
log an entry?”), assessment on productivity perception (e.g.,
“When did you feel productive?”), and insights gained from
the tracking (e.g., “What did you learn about your productive
activities through tracking?”).

Data Analysis
From Productivity Journals, we first examined journaling
patterns such as the number of entries and duration of the
activities. We did not analyze the data from Skip Journals
because they contained too few entries (only seven entries
by six participants).

To understand participants’ reasoning of productivity eval-
uation, we analyzed the open-ended answers in the rationale
fields. Following the thematic analysis approach [5], three
authors independently coded a subset of the entries (200
entries; 24%) to identify emerging themes regarding factors
involved in the productivity assessment. As rationale can
include more than one theme, we multi-coded the entries. Af-
ter reaching an agreement in the coding scheme (Table 3) by
resolving discrepancies in coding through multiple sessions
of discussion, one researcher coded the remaining data.

To identify task categories of productive activities, we
categorized unique task names found in the tasks fields. We
referred to the answers in the rationale fields and the inter-
view transcripts to disambiguate what participants actually
did for tasks with a vague name (e.g., ‘etc.’). We iteratively
developed task categories and sub-categories. After identi-
fying all task categories from our dataset, we finalized their
names so that they are compatible with the task category
names in Czerwinski and colleagues’ work [12] (e.g., project,
routine task, email, and personal).

4 RESULTS
We report the results of our study in three parts: (1) descrip-
tive summary of diary entries; (2) rationales for productivity
evaluation; and (3) task types of productive activities.

Descriptive Summary of Diary Entries
During the 2-week deployment, we collected 830 Productiv-
ity Journal entries captured by 24 participants. The entries
contained a total of 1,197 hours of activities. Of the 830 en-
tries, 104 (12.53%) contained two or more tasks (indicating
multitasking or multifaceted nature of the activity), and 752
(90.60%) entries were captured during the weekdays. In Ta-
ble 2, we summarize the details about the entries captured
in weekdays and weekends.

CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 615Page 4Number of entriesa Avg. # of entries Total duration

Total

Weekdays

Weekends

752 (262/312/178)
78 (22/31/25)
830 (284/343/203)

1,063 hours
134 hours
1,197 hours
a Inside parenthesis: neural/productive/very productive entry count.
Table 2: Summary statistics of the Productivity Journal.

31.33 (N = 24)
4.87 (N = 16)
34.58 (N = 24)

Figure 2: Total duration of the captured activities for each
participant (grouped by the productivity levels).

Participants recorded entries for an average of 9.20 week-
days (SD = 1.10), with 14 participants recording all 10 week-
days. Although the weekends were optional, four partici-
pants completed all 14 days. Participants recorded an av-
erage of 49.88 hours of productive activities in total (SD =
26.66), and the entries from weekdays occupied 4.42 hours
per day. However, there was a high interpersonal variation
in total duration and the proportion of each productivity
level (Figure 2). The average length of activity duration in
each entry was 86.53 minutes (SD = 74.62), while 56.63% (470
entries) of the activities lasted no more than an hour. The
average length of activity per participant ranged from 43.37
to 157.15 minutes. The number of unique tasks participants
captured ranged from 2 to 17 (M = 8.83, SD = 4.15).

We note that participants might not have clearly excluded
unproductive activities on their entries. Some entries with
neutral label might have captured both the least productive
and unproductive activities: we encountered several entries
which mention the “unproductiveness” in their rationales.
This might have affected our results to be a bit more inclusive

for unproductive activities. However, given the qualitative
nature of our study and such entries’ relevance to productiv-
ity, the small number of such additional entries have minimal
threats to the validity of our investigation.

Rationales for Productivity Evaluation
Analyzing the rationale field of the diary, we identified 21
subthemes of productivity evaluation which are grouped into
six themes (Table 3). In the following subsections, we discuss
each theme and contributing subthemes in more detail.

Work Product. Participants considered the output of the
activities as an important aspect contributing to their pro-
ductivity. We identified four factors constituting the work
product: concrete output and progress, conceptual achieve-
ment, quality of the output, and quantity of the output.

Concrete output & progress and conceptual achieve-
ment refer to tangible and intangible forms of achievement
from tasks, respectively. Producing concrete outputs—such
as implementing a new feature, making a design artifact, or
documenting a design idea—made participants perceive a
task productive. It was also considered productive that they
could resolve an issue or make a concrete progress from a
meeting (e.g., making decisions on the agenda). In addition,
conceptual achievement—such as gaining insights, coming
up with ideas, and acquiring knowledge—contributed to pro-
ductivity. In the exit interview, P9 remarked, “When I learn
new concepts I feel somewhat proud of it, although this feeling
of making progress could be illusory ... I rated many such cases
highly productive.”

Both quality and quantity were important factors when
assessing individuals’ work product. Given that the output
quality matters in knowledge work [18], we found many
cases in which participants related the output quality to
“how productive” they were in the task. In this vein, low out-
put quality made them feel less productive and even stressful
because it could hinder the progress or require additional
task. Quantity of the output was usually manifested in mod-
ifier expressions: many (decisions made), much (inspiration),
largest (to-do items), or various (ideas). Interestingly, a ma-
jority of the quantity-based reflection on work product was
about the conceptual achievement rather than objective and
quantifiable tasks.

Time Management. Recognizing time as a limited resource
of life [54], participants reflected on time-related factors
of their activities. We identified three time-related factors:
efficiency & intensity, punctuality, and use of spare time.

Efficiency & intensity and punctuality both involve
the elapsed time of the work, but their focus is different. For
efficiency & intensity, participants focused on the perceived
amount of work during a given period, or whether they com-
pleted a task faster than they expected or planned. A mental

Total Duration (Hours)0102030405060708090100110120130P13P9P11P2P20P24P6P17P23P18P14P10P3P16P19P22P7P21P4P1P8P12P5P15NeutralProductiveVery ProductiveCHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 615Page 5Theme

Subtheme

Example Rationale Answers

Concrete output & progress

“Presented future directions to the team and received feedback from them” – very productive [P21]

Work
product

Conceptual achievement

Quality of the outcome

Quantity of the outcome

“Although it [seminar] was outside of my research area, it inspired me to reflect on my research directions.”
– productive [P11]

“Because the quality of the design draft was so poor, it was stressful to go through the feedback I received”
– neutral [P24]

“I had a long conversation with my colleague for three hours. He gave me much advice on how to manage
my career, how to bear a job, how to protect my work, and so on.” – productive [P22]

Time
management

Efficiency & intensity

Punctuality

“Prepared for the class efficiently, pressured by a tight schedule” – very productive [P11]
“Mainly small talks, in a business meeting.” – neutral [P2]
“Answered all the emails in the inbox before the time to go home!” – very productive [P7]

Use of spare time

“Read a book leveraging the time to commute.” – productive [P4].

Worker’s
state

Attention & distraction

“Highly focused in the morning; completed the presentation slide” – very productive [P17]

Emotional state

“Grappled with the UI flow ... Ideas from two are better than one, and three are much better than two. I
felt good!” – productive [P22]

Physical state

“It dragged on as I was dozing” – neutral [P16]

Chores and mundane task

“It was just a Monday weekly meeting, rarely meaningful to me.” – neutral [P21]

Attitude
toward work

Enjoyment of the task

“Built and tested the app‼ Although I was not in a good condition, I was completely focused on the work
because it was enjoyable to produce highly concrete output.” – very productive [P17]

Significance of the task

“Focused [on the meeting] because of my role (scribe)” – productive [P23]

Rewarding self-regulation

“Even though I didn’t want [to go to the gym], I did go!” – productive [P20]

Impact
and benefit

Long-term career benefit

“Talked with my colleague about why I wanted to resign from the company, what was tough for me and
what I couldn’t resolve here ... I thought I should consider more alternatives including different types of
startup companies” – very productive [P22]

Social and spiritual benefit

“It is very productive to serve the community [church] I belong to” – very productive [P13]

Self-management & well-being “[Drumming] Not improved much ’cause I didn’t practice hard ... beat is still unstable.” – neutral [P16]

Monetary rewards

“Saved both time and budget, by buying an air ticket in advance” – productive [P18]

Compound
task

Task switching
by interruptions

Multitasking

Unexpected issues

“Found a critical issue in the app while improving the design of home screen -> Notified the problem to
developers [interrupting task] -> Couldn’t complete my original task” – neutral [P16]

“Finished multiple tasks, including email follow-ups and phone calls, at once, which may normally take 3
hours long.” – very productive [P9]

“The power strip had short-circuited, making me stop working and go home. Totally frustrated especially
because I was highly productive until then. :( ” – neutral [P1]

Table 3: Six themes of productivity evaluation derived from the rationale field answers.

pressure imposed by a deadline or the next task in a queue
sometimes led to high efficiency, whereas no urgency led
some participants to be laid-back. The assessment of a meet-
ing productivity frequently referred to efficiency & intensity:
participants perceived a business meeting less productive
when the conversation derailed. Low proficiency was also
the cause of low efficiency.

For punctuality, participants focused primarily on whether
they completed a task on time or met a deadline—either an
external deadline (e.g., deadline to send a document) or self-
imposed one (e.g., hoping to finish tasks before the closing
hour). In some domains (e.g., counseling), punctuality was
considered an important value. For example, P19 was sensi-
tive to the punctuality of her counseling session (e.g., “gave
insights [to the client], finished on time” – very productive). In

the exit interview, she remarked a reason for this: “Counsel-
ing is conducted under very strict rules so it’s really important
to be punctual ... everything we do is a promise between the
client and myself, which gives insights to the client.”

Use of spare time reflects participants’ aspiration that
they want to use or save their time wisely. Participants com-
monly used their commute time (e.g., on the bus, on the
subway) to do personally meaningful tasks.

Worker’s State. Personal states during or after the activity
affected how participants perceive their performance or pro-
ductivity. Participants captured three major states: attention
and distraction, emotional state, and physical state.

Attention refers to the state in which participants were
able to concentrate on their tasks, while distraction refers
to diverting the attention by losing the ability to focus on
their tasks. Participants felt they were productive when they

CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 615Page 6could stay focused for a while because it affects the quality
of output and work efficiency. In the entries, participants
frequently mentioned that they could complete a task or
produce an output as planned because they concentrated on
the task. In contrast, participants felt less productive when
distracted: they captured various distracting behaviors such
as using social media or a smartphone.

Emotional and physical states also affected productivity.
Participants recorded various psychological reactions to a
task—such as feeling accomplished, satisfied, or depressed.
For exercise and leisure activities, for example, participants
perceived high productivity when they felt refreshed, re-
lieved stress, or were pleased. Also, participants’ physical
condition was associated with other factors, such as atten-
tion and efficiency. The entries mentioning the physical state
consistently indicated that a good physical condition yielded
a high level of focus, and a poor physical condition yielded
a low level of attention (e.g., dozing). Factors affecting the
physical condition included sleep, fatigue, and sickness.

Attitude Toward Work. Participants’ attitude toward a
task influenced their perceived productivity—i.e., differences
in receptiveness such as personal values, meaningfulness,
significance, or willingness yielded different perception of
productivity. We identified four salient types of such recep-
tiveness: chores and mundane tasks, enjoyment, significance,
and rewarding self-regulation.

Chores and mundane tasks, not pleasant but necessary
routines, were what participants were usually unwilling to
do, marking such activities to be the least productive (i.e.,
neutral). Participants seemed to distinguish the tasks involv-
ing their creative knowledge (e.g., design, development) from
others (e.g., paperwork, data entry). When evaluating chores,
participants rarely considered the quality, but how quickly
they could handle the chores. On the other hand, significant
tasks stimulated participants to be more focused. Dealing
with a task with a potential to impact the work process or
being in charge of making a decision were considered sig-
nificant. Examples from the entries include making a big
decision for the theme of design, gaining important informa-
tion for decision making, and resolving a critical logic error
in source code.

When participants enjoyed the task, they were immersed
themselves and sometimes outperformed, feeling highly pro-
ductive. In contrast, participants perceived a task less pro-
ductive when they did not want to do it. Doing unenjoyable
tasks, participants were likely to feel themselves distracted
and inefficient.

Self-regulatory behaviors such as overcoming procras-
tination and partaking self-disciplinary activities were con-
sidered productive. For example, managing to go to a gym
even when tired was considered to be productive regardless

of the intensity of the exercise. Other examples included
dealing with a postponed paperwork or housework.

Impact and Benefit. Participants valued the activities that
have potential benefits on their careers, relationships, well-
being, or finance. We identified four types of impact and
benefits: long-term career benefit, social and spiritual benefit,
self-management & well-being, and monetary rewards.

Long-term career benefit reflects participants’ interests
in personal development and their long-term career path.
Participants captured activities that were expected to have
positive effects on their career, such as developing a skill set
or building a good professional reputation. At the time of
the diary study, for example, P22 was concerning about a
job transfer. She captured the productive activities of having
conversations with colleagues or a family member that con-
tributed to helping her make a decision (See example quotes
in Table 3). In the exit interview, she explained the benefit of
constructive conversation: “Thinking a lot about my future
and career, I felt I could benefit from talking with someone
about it ... When I told my colleague that I was considering a
transfer, he gave me helpful advice. It was interesting that I
felt productive doing such things.”

Social and spiritual benefit reflects participants’ aware-
ness of the relationships with others, and their personal faith.
Participants considered their activities productive when the
activities had a positive impact on their relationships with
family or colleagues. In addition, two participants captured
religious activities such as prayer, worship, and small group
activities in church. Productivity of these activities were
evaluated based on the spiritual benefit they delivered (e.g.,
concentrating on the prayer).

Benefits regarding wellness—self-management & well-
being and monetary rewards—were connected to produc-
tivity. Participants aspired to enrich their well-being with
activities such as exercising, getting a haircut, having a hobby,
and baking at home. Although such activities were mostly
considered productive by themselves, participants also con-
sidered the quality or intensity of activities for exercise or
practice. Although relatively few cases were recorded, finan-
cial activities such as refinancing or buying an early-bird
ticket financially benefited participants, and thus were per-
ceived productive.

Compound Task. Sometimes, a few tasks were interleaved
and performed in parallel. We identified three situations that
involve compound tasks: task switching by interruptions,
multitasking, and unexpected issues.

Task switching by interruption frequently occurred,
making participants feel less productive. The interrupting
tasks included urgent requests from a colleague, answering
an urgent email or phone call, sporadic microtasks, and an

CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 615Page 7Category / Subcategory

Description

Entry Count

Example Task Names

Routine Task

Learning

Paperwork, writing and processing documents.

169 (20%) - 20Ps Administration tasks, Handling documents

Information acquirement, learning,
and knowledge gain.

164 (20%) - 20Ps Attending Seminar, Search, Reading books,

Taking an online course, Group speaking

Commu-
nication

Project

Face-to-face meeting Communication in person, usually with colleagues. 182 (22%) - 17Ps Project Meeting, Briefing, Counseling

Emails

Dealing with e-mails

57 (7%) - 7Ps Writing emails

Conference Call

Communicating with people remotely.

20 (2%) - 5Ps

Customer comm., Phone call

Documenting &
Conceptualizing Ideas
Experiment &
Development

Activities for planning and organizing ideas
into a form of document.
Activities for implementation, experimentation,
and problem solving through systemic processes.

Producing design artifacts.

118 (14%) - 12Ps Planning service flows, Paper writing,

68 (8%) - 5Ps

46 (6%) - 6Ps

Writing a user scenario
Programming, Conducting a molecular biologi-
cal experiment, Data analysis

Design-related, Logo design, Improving home
screen

Self-care for health and wellness including exercise
and medical treatments.

Activities which people perform during their free
time to regenerate.

52 (6%) - 10Ps Corporate fitness center, swimming, yoga,

receiving treatment

31 (4%) - 5Ps Watching Netflix, Home brewing, Team retreat,

[Hobby] drumming

Conversations, interactions, meals, and any other
social activities with acquaintances or family.

17 (2%) - 6Ps

Personal conversation, With my family, Wor-
ship, Orchestra practice

Household activities, shopping, and finances.

6 (1%) - 4Ps

Housekeeping, Shopping for groceries

Design

Health

Personal

Leisure

Social

Living

Scheduling &
Environmental Setups

Coordinating schedules, reviewing past tasks, and
maintenance activities for work-related facilities.

25 (3%) - 4Ps

Planning, Environmental setup for experiment

Table 4: Task categories with a brief description, entry count with the number of participants (Ps), and example task names.
Note that a single entry can contain multiple tasks so there are overlaps in entry count.

unexpected roadblock during a task. In other cases, partici-
pants performed multiple tasks at once—i.e., multitasking.
Unlike task switching, multitasking yielded mixed percep-
tions of productivity: simultaneous handling of mundane
tasks was often perceived as incessant chores, whereas delib-
erate multitasking yielded a feeling of working intensively.
Unexpected issues, usually caused by the malfunction
of facilities or work devices for the task, adversely affected
the productivity. Participants perceived such cases less pro-
ductive because they were unable to complete the task as
planned or had to resolve that unexpected issues.

Task Types of Productive Activities
From the analysis of the 183 unique task names found in the
entries’ tasks field, we identified 13 prominent task categories
(Table 4). Ten of them are grouped under three high-level
categories—communication, project, and personal—based on
their relevance. Some of the task categories are consistent
with prior works regarding the capture of common activities
of knowledge workers. For example, routine tasks, emails,
conference call, project, and personal categories were also
prevalent in Czerwinski and colleagues’ work [12]. Reinhardt
and colleagues [42] identifies a set of 12 actions in knowledge
work, which roughly overlaps our categories in terms of
learning, project, and communication. In this section, we
highlight notable categories.

Learning. As information is an important capital for knowl-
edge workers, learning activities covered both the work and
non-work contexts. In workplace, participants took seminars
or online courses mandatory for employee education. Some-
times they gathered references or case studies to inform the
design of user interfaces. In the non-work context, partici-
pants read books or participated in a study group to learn or
improve skills (e.g., learn how to speak English).

Communication. Communication was an essential activity
of participants’ work. Specifically, the in-person communi-
cation was very prevalent; Participants had frequent ad-hoc
meetings for decision making, supervisor briefings, etc. In
contrast to the prior works that considered emails as a promi-
nent task of knowledge workers [12, 36], only seven partic-
ipants treated handling emails as an explicit task. Instead,
we found cases where participants considered emails as a
part of a higher-level task, typically project-related; 12 diary
entries described the email-related behaviors only in the ra-
tionale field. For example, P16 reported, “App design renewal”
as a task and “Finalized the design and sent it via email and
messenger” as a rationale.

Personal. Thirteen percentage of the diary entries (n = 106)
contained personal activities submitted by 15 participants.
Specifically, ten participants included health-related activ-
ities such as exercise and getting a medical treatment; five

CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 615Page 8included their leisure activities such as hobbies; six included
social activities such as hanging out with friends and partic-
ipating in a religious group; and four included household-
related activities such as a grocery shopping and cleaning
the house.

5 DISCUSSION
Our study extends prior productivity research in two ways.
First, we characterized what constitute productive activities.
Second, we identified the productive activities beyond work-
related tasks that people perceived to be important. Here,
we discuss implications for designing technologies that can
help individuals capture and improve their productivity.

Productivity as a Multifaceted Concept
In designing our diary study, we assumed that the target of
productivity evaluation was task types and the time block.
This decision was in accordance with existing productiv-
ity tools (e.g., [43]), where a person or a system assesses
whether the time spent on a certain task was productive.
However, our results drawn from people’s productivity ra-
tionale showed that how people assess productivity is more
complex than our assumption. Sometimes, a predisposition
to a task—whether a task is significant or trivial—had a strong
effect on people’s productivity perceptions. In some occa-
sions, people’s emotional and physical states and their level
of attention directly corresponded to the productivity. Other
times, the result (i.e., work product, impact of the work) of
the time spent was analogous to the level of productivity.

We note that many of the productivity attributes that we
identified are largely missing from the current productivity
tool design. For example, existing productivity tools rarely
capture work product, even though this is one of the two
defining factors of productivity (i.e., “output”) according to
the traditional term. Although we do not assert that all at-
tributes we identified should be captured by the productivity
monitoring tools, our results suggest that productivity be
treated as a multifaceted concept rather than a homogeneous
concept. As such, we should rethink how productivity tools
should be designed to incorporate the level of sophistication.

Diverse Productive Activities in Work Contexts
As computing devices such as laptops, desktops, and mobile
devices have been commonly used in knowledge work [24],
prior productivity tracking tools and research studies have
focused primarily on the work involving such devices. How-
ever, we observed many cases where work-related activities
seemed to be performed without using computing devices.
These activities included face-to-face meetings and offline
learning activities (e.g., reading books and research papers).
Also, prior studies show that people consciously do not use
devices (e.g., lock them out of their phone when they need

to focus), as well as move outside of the office environment
(e.g., have walking meetings to avoid prolonged sitting and
to increase in creative thinking [9]) to be productive.

The omnipresence of computing devices made the distinc-
tion between work and life fuzzy, which was also manifested
in our study results. Although we did not report in depth,
many of the work-related activities were performed outside
the “typical” work hours of 9 a.m. to 6 p.m., which indicates
that work can take place anytime and anywhere. When pro-
ductivity tracking tools only account for the activities that
involve computers or that take place in the traditional office
setting—as in the case of many current productivity tools,
we miss out important aspects of work. Thus, we should
consider a broad range of tasks and work environments to
be the focus of productivity.

Productive Activities in Personal Contexts
Although we did not restrict participants to capture only
work-related activities for productivity evaluation, we had
assumed that the majority of the tasks would be work-related,
specifically regarding their primary job. However, we were
surprised to find that a wide range of activities in personal
contexts were perceived productive. The results implied that
personal matters related to health, leisure, social, and house-
hold are as important as work-related ones and are subject
to productivity evaluation.

During the study, one participant (P22) was thinking about
switching jobs, which means that the activities that she did
outside of her current job (e.g., updating resume and portfolio,
having a conversation about job prospects) were considered
as important as, or even more important than the activities
for her current job. In general, activities that count toward
participants’ long-term career benefits were considered im-
portant and productive. For some, personal productivity may
be achieved at the expense of organizational productivity;
for others, organizational productivity has precedence over
personal, or personally meaningful productivity. We see a
growing number of workplace productivity monitoring tools
(e.g., Desk Time [15], Time Doctor [49], Veriato [50]) de-
signed to improve the overall organizational productivity.
However, our investigation calls for a different kind of pro-
ductivity tools that prioritize individual values and their
long-term career, while having a symbiotic relationship with
organizational productivity.

Factors Affecting Productivity
Rationales for productivity evaluation were highly related to
one another, which was also the reason why we multi-coded.
For example, chores and mundane tasks were frequently con-
nected to attention and distraction, and the low attention
was in turn connected to efficiency and intensity, leading to
low perceived productivity. This connection is supported by

CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 615Page 9other studies (e.g., Bored and partly Rote in [35], and Chores
in [18]). Although confirming these observations in a quanti-
tative way is beyond the scope of our investigation, it would
be interesting to explore the relationship among some of the
themes (e.g., between attitude toward work and efficiency).
Furthermore, examining the causal relationship between
productivity themes and productivity evaluation (e.g., rela-
tionship between the worker’s state and the productivity)
warrants future work.

Opportunities for Tracking Tool Customization
Although our study participants entered a large number of
tasks (183 unique task names), individual participants en-
gaged in only a handful of tasks (8.8 unique task names on
average). In other words, there were large individual differ-
ences in participants’ tasks, but each participant repeated
a small set of tasks. This finding indicates the need and
opportunity for customizing productivity trackers to fit an
individual’s context and preference.

In our study, manual tracking allowed participants to cap-
ture productive context and activities beyond the comput-
erized environment (e.g., reading a printed research paper,
having informal conversations). We, however, note that some
tasks might be easy to track automatically, whereas others
might require a person to manually register. For example,
distracted behaviors involving computing devices such as
visiting social media and activating or unlocking a smart-
phone can be easily captured automatically, but not manually.
Moreover, they can also be classified as “unproductive” ac-
tivities automatically, although such automatic classification
is vulnerable to false-positive prediction.

Resolving this tension between the manual and automated
productivity tracking is still a challenge for the design of com-
prehensive productivity monitoring tools. Recently, Choe
and colleagues [7] introduced the notion of Semi-Automated
Tracking in designing self-tracking tools by balancing both
manual and automated capture methods. We envision that
this semi-automated tracking approach is a promising direc-
tion for designing comprehensive and personalized produc-
tivity monitoring tools. In addition to the division of labor
between manual and automated capture methods, the semi-
automated tracking approach allows people to confirm or
correct the measure of automated capture, which improves
tracking tools’ overall accuracy.

Our findings showed a broad range of evaluation met-
rics (e.g., importance, outcome, worker’s state) and activity
categories. Given the diversity of possible tracking items,
having a tracker preparation phase for a week or so could
help people identify personally meaningful tracking items
and evaluation metrics. People then can leverage a flexible
tracker creation platform such as OmniTrack [28] to create a
custom tracker. Moreover, as people’s tracking practice tend

to change over time [28], it is important to allow them to
refine the tracker design on the go.

Study Limitations
Although we aimed to recruit participants from diverse back-
grounds (11 types of occupations), our study participants
may not be representative of overall knowledge workers. For
example, clinicians, writers, or journalists are a few examples
who engage in the different nature of the work compared to
our participants. Studying with a broader range of people
would likely provide more diverse results (e.g., identifying
new themes of productivity evaluation).

We also note that participants’ cultural background might
have affected our dataset: due to the long work hours in
South Korea, our participants might have collected more
entries or more work-related entries even though long work
hours do not necessarily imply high productivity.

Our method could have oversampled less productive (i.e.,
neutral) activities and undersampled productive activities.
However, prior studies have shown that people like to cap-
ture positive behaviors because it feels rewarding and good,
whereas capturing negative behaviors can serve as negative
reinforcement (e.g., [27]). In addition, 20.6% of productivity
journal entries were captured at 9 p.m. or after, indicating
“backlogging” or late work. We thus believe that our data
capture protocol did not likely bias the dataset.

6 CONCLUSION
In this paper, we reported a diary study (N = 24) conducted
to understand how knowledge workers conceptualize their
personal productivity. Over the course of two weeks, we
collected self-report data on activities that were perceived
to be productive and the rationales for the assessment. From
the diary and semi-structured interview data, we distilled
rich contexts and various aspects affecting the perception
of productivity, which are broad and highly personalized.
As we rethink the design of productivity tracking tools, we
envision leveraging the semi-automated tracking approach
by combining both manual and automated ways to capture
comprehensive and personally meaningful tasks. Our work
contributes to the growing body of literature on personal
informatics with a focus on personal productivity, providing
implications for designing a comprehensive productivity
tracking tools. We hope this study can help others working
in the field gain insight regarding ways to better support
tracking of personal productivity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank our study participants for their time and efforts.
We also thank Junhoe Kim and Valérie Erb for improving
the OmniTrack platform. This work was supported in part
by NSF award 1753452 and a gift from Microsoft Research.

CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 615Page 10REFERENCES
[1] David Allen. 2001. Getting Things Done : The Art of Stress-free Produc-

tivity. Viking, New York.

[2] Arnold B. Bakker and Matthijs P. Bal. 2010. Weekly Work Engagement
and Performance: A Study Among Starting Teachers. Journal of Oc-
cupational and Organizational Psychology 83, 1 (mar 2010), 189–206.
https://doi.org/10.1348/096317909X402596

[3] Niall Bolger, Angelina Davis, and Eshkol Rafaeli. 2003. Diary Methods:
Capturing Life as It Is Lived. Annual Review of Psychology 54, 1 (2003),
579–616. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.psych.54.101601.145030
[4] Jelmer P. Borst, Niels A. Taatgen, and Hedderik van Rijn. 2015. What
Makes Interruptions Disruptive?: A Process-Model Account of the
Effects of the Problem State Bottleneck on Task Interruption and Re-
sumption. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
2971–2980. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702156

[5] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke. 2006. Using Thematic Analysis
in Psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology 3, 2 (2006), 77–101.
https://doi.org/10.1191/1478088706qp063oa

[6] Arthur P. Brief and Ramon J. Aldag. 1975. Employee Reactions to
Job Characteristics: A Constructive Replication. Journal of Applied
Psychology 60, 2 (1975), 182–186. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0076548
[7] Eun Kyoung Choe, Saeed Abdullah, Mashfiqui Rabbi, Edison Thomaz,
Daniel A Epstein, Felicia Cordeiro, Matthew Kay, Gregory D Abowd,
Tanzeem Choudhury, James Fogarty, Bongshin Lee, Mark Matthews,
and Julie A Kientz. 2017. Semi-Automated Tracking: A Balanced
Approach for Self-Monitoring Applications. IEEE Pervasive Computing
16, 1 (Jan 2017), 74–84. https://doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2017.18

[8] Eun Kyoung Choe, Bongshin Lee, Matthew Kay, Wanda Pratt, and
Julie A. Kientz. 2015. SleepTight: Low-burden, Self-monitoring Tech-
nology for Capturing and Reflecting on Sleep Behaviors. In Proceedings
of the 2015 ACM International Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiq-
uitous Computing (UbiComp ’15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 121–132.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804266

[9] Russell Clayton, Christopher Thomas, and Jack Smothers. 2015. How
to do walking meetings right. Harvard Business Review (2015). https:
//hbr.org/2015/08/how-to-do-walking-meetings-right

[10] Derek Clements-Croome and Yamuna Kaluarachchi. 2000. Assessment
and measurement of productivity. In Creating the Productive Work
Place. E & FN Spon, Chapter 10, 129–166.

[11] Codealike. 2018. Codealike: Powerful Metrics for High Performance

Developers. (2018). https://codealike.com/

[12] Mary Czerwinski, Eric Horvitz, and Susan Wilhite. 2004. A Diary
Study of Task Switching and Interruptions. In Proceedings of the 2004
conference on Human factors in computing systems (CHI ’04). ACM Press,
New York, NY, USA, 175–182. https://doi.org/10.1145/985692.985715
[13] Laura Dabbish, Gloria Mark, and Víctor M. González. 2011. Why Do I
Keep Interrupting Myself?: Environment, Habit and Self-interruption.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI ’11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3127–3130. https://doi.
org/10.1145/1978942.1979405

[14] Thomas H Davenport. 2005. Thinking for A Living: How to Get Better
Performance and Results from Knowledge Workers. Notes 18, 4 (2005),
599–603. https://doi.org/10.1002/hrdq.1221

[15] DeskTime. 2018. Automatic Business Time-Tracking Software | Desk-

Time. (2018). https://desktime.com

[16] Nancy G. Dodd and Daniel C. Ganster. 1996. The Interactive Effects of
Variety, Autonomy, and Feedback on Attitudes and Performance. Jour-
nal of Organizational Behavior 17, 4 (jul 1996), 329–347. https://doi.org/
10.1002/(SICI)1099-1379(199607)17:4<329::AID-JOB754>3.0.CO;2-B

[17] Peter F. Drucker. 1991. The new productivity challenge. Harvard
business review 69, 6 (1991), 69–69. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/

pubmed/10114929

[18] Peter F Drucker. 1999. Knowledge-Worker Productivity: The Biggest
Challenge. California Management Review 41, 2 (jan 1999), 79–94.
https://doi.org/10.2307/41165987

[19] J. Richard Hackman and Greg R. Oldham. 1976. Motivation through
the Design of Work: Test of a Theory. Organizational Behavior and
Human Performance 16, 2 (1976), 250–279. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0030-5073(76)90016-7 arXiv:arXiv:1011.1669v3

[20] Barry P. Haynes. 2007. An evaluation of office productivity mea-
surement. Journal of Corporate Real Estate 9, 3 (jul 2007), 144–155.
https://doi.org/10.1108/14630010710845730

[21] Alexis Hiniker, Sungsoo Ray Hong, Tadayoshi Kohno, and Julie A
Kientz. 2016. MyTime: Designing and Evaluating an Intervention for
Smartphone Non-Use. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16). ACM Press, New York,
NY, USA, 4746–4757. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858403
[22] Kevin Holesh. 2018. Moment – Automatically track your and your
family’s daily iPhone and iPad use. (2018). https://inthemoment.io/
[23] Jing Jin and Laura A. Dabbish. 2009. Self-interruption on the Computer:
A Typology of Discretionary Task Interleaving. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’09).
ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1799–1808. https://doi.org/10.1145/1518701.
1518979

[24] Tero Jokela, Jarno Ojala, and Thomas Olsson. 2015. A Diary Study on
Combining Multiple Information Devices in Everyday Activities and
Tasks. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’15). ACM Press, New York, NY,
USA, 3903–3912. https://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702211

[25] Inyeop Kim, Gyuwon Jung, Hayoung Jung, Minsam Ko, and Uichin Lee.
2017. Let&Rsquo;s FOCUS: Mitigating Mobile Phone Use in College
Classrooms. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 1,
3, Article 63 (Sept. 2017), 29 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3130928

[26] Jaejeung Kim, Chiwoo Cho, and Uichin Lee. 2017. Technology Sup-
ported Behavior Restriction for Mitigating Self-Interruptions in Multi-
device Environments. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous
Technol. 1, 3, Article 64 (Sept. 2017), 21 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3130932

[27] Young-Ho Kim, Jae Ho Jeon, Eun Kyoung Choe, Bongshin Lee, Kwon-
Hyun Kim, and Jinwook Seo. 2016. TimeAware: Leveraging Framing
Effects to Enhance Personal Productivity. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16). ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 272–283. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858428
[28] Young-Ho Kim, Jae Ho Jeon, Bongshin Lee, Eun Kyoung Choe, and
Jinwook Seo. 2017. OmniTrack: A Flexible Self-Tracking Approach
Leveraging Semi-Automated Tracking.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob.
Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. 1, 3, Article 67 (Sept. 2017), 28 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3130930

[29] Minsam Ko, Seungwoo Choi, Koji Yatani, and Uichin Lee. 2016. Lock
n’ LoL: Group-based Limiting Assistance App to Mitigate Smart-
phone Distractions in Group Activities. In Proceedings of the 2016
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16).
ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, 998–1010. https://doi.org/10.1145/
2858036.2858568

[30] Minsam Ko, Kyong-Mee Chung, Subin Yang, Joonwon Lee, Christian
Heizmann, Jinyoung Jeong, Uichin Lee, Daehee Shin, Koji Yatani, and
Junehwa Song. 2015. NUGU: A Group-based Intervention App for
Improving Self-Regulation of Limiting Smartphone Use. In Proceedings
of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work
& Social Computing (CSCW ’15). ACM Press, New York, NY, USA,
1235–1245. https://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675244

[31] Sai Loo. 2017. Creative Working in the Knowledge Economy. Routledge,

London, UK. 178 pages.

CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 615Page 11[32] ManicTime. 2018. Time Tracker Management Tracking Software.

https://www.rescuetime.com

(2018). https://www.manictime.com/

[33] Gloria Mark, Mary Czerwinski, and Shamsi T Iqbal. 2018. Effects
of Individual Differences in Blocking Workplace Distractions. In
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems (CHI ’18). ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, 1–12.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3173666

[34] Gloria Mark, Victor M. Gonzalez, and Justin Harris. 2005. No Task Left
Behind?: Examining the Nature of Fragmented Work. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI
’05). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 321–330. https://doi.org/10.1145/
1054972.1055017

[35] Gloria Mark, Shamsi T. Iqbal, Mary Czerwinski, and Paul Johns. 2014.
Bored Mondays and Focused Afternoons. In Proceedings of the 32nd
annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems (CHI
’14). ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, 3025–3034. https://doi.org/10.
1145/2556288.2557204

[36] Gloria Mark, Shamsi T. Iqbal, Mary Czerwinski, Paul Johns, Akane
Sano, and Yuliya Lutchyn. 2016. Email Duration, Batching and Self-
interruption. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’16). ACM Press, New York, NY,
USA, 1717–1728. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858262

[37] Andre N. Meyer, Gail C. Murphy, Thomas Zimmermann, and Thomas
Fritz. 2017. Retrospecting on Work and Productivity: A Study on Self-
Monitoring Software Developers’ Work. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput.
Interact. 1, CSCW, Article 79 (Dec. 2017), 24 pages. https://doi.org/10.
1145/3134714

[38] Viktoria Pammer, Stefan Edler, and Hermann Stern. 2012. Visualising
the Fragmentation of Knowledge Work. In Proceedings of the 7th Nordic
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Making Sense Through
Design (NordiCHI ’12). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 779–780. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/2399016.2399143

[39] Robert D Pritchard. 1995. Productivity measurement and improvement:
Organizational case studies. Greenwood Publishing Group, Santa Bar-
bara, CA, USA.

[40] Yuri W. Ramírez and David a. Nembhard. 2004. Measuring knowl-
Journal of Intellectual Capital 5, 4
https://doi.org/10.1108/14691930410567040

edge worker productivity.
(dec 2004), 602–628.
arXiv:http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/BIJ-10-2012-0068

[41] Robert B Reich. 2002. The Future of Success: Working and Living in the

New Economy. Vintage, New York, NY, USA.

[42] Wolfgang Reinhardt, Benedikt Schmidt, Peter Sloep, and Hendrik
Drachsler. 2011. Knowledge Worker Roles and Actions—Results of Two
Empirical Studies. Knowledge and Process Management 18, 3 (jul 2011),
150–174. https://doi.org/10.1002/kpm.378 arXiv:arXiv:1011.1669v3

[43] RescueTime. 2018. RescueTime: Time management software for
(2018).

staying productive and happy in the modern workplace.

[44] John Rooksby, Parvin Asadzadeh, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and
Matthew Chalmers. 2016. Personal Tracking of Screen Time on Digital
Devices. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems (CHI ’16). ACM Press, New York, NY, USA, 284–296.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858055

[45] Anjeli Singh and Sareeka Malhotra. 2013. A Researcher’s Guide to
Running Diary Studies. In Proceedings of the 11th Asia Pacific Confer-
ence on Computer Human Interaction - APCHI ’13. ACM Press, New
York, NY, USA, 296–300. https://doi.org/10.1145/2525194.2525261
[46] Mark Snyder. 1974. Self-monitoring of Expressive Behavior. Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 30, 4 (1974), 526–537.
https:
//doi.org/10.1037/h0037039

[47] April J. Spivack and Beth A. Rubin. 2011. Spaces to Control Creative
Output of the Knowledge Worker: A Managerial Paradox?. In Proceed-
ings of the 2011 iConference (iConference ’11). ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 312–318. https://doi.org/10.1145/1940761.1940804

[48] Toon W Taris and Paul J G Schreurs. 2009. Well-being and orga-
nizational performance: An organizational-level test of the happy-
productive worker hypothesis. Work & Stress 23, 2 (2009), 120–136.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02678370903072555

[49] TimeDoctor. 2018. Smart Employee Time Tracking Software with
Screenshots | Time Doctor. (2018). https://www.timedoctor.com
[50] Veriato. 2018. Veriato | Insider Threat Detection, Employee Monitoring

Software. (2018). https://www.veriato.com

[51] Wakatime. 2018. WakaTime – Open source plugins, goals, and auto-
matic time tracking for programmers. (2018). https://wakatime.com/
[52] Steve Whittaker, Vaiva Kalnikaite, Victoria Hollis, and Andrew Guy-
dish. 2016. ’Don’t Waste My Time’: Use of Time Information Improves
Focus. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems (CHI ’16). ACM Press, New York, NY, USA,
1729–1738. https://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858193

[53] Thomas A. Wright, Russell Cropanzano, and Douglas G. Bonett.
2007. The Moderating Role of Employee Positive Well Being on
the Relation Between Job Satisfaction and Job Performance. Jour-
nal of Occupational Health Psychology 12, 2 (2007), 93–104. https:
//doi.org/10.1037/1076-8998.12.2.93 arXiv:arXiv:1011.1669v3

[54] Dezhi Wu and Marilyn Tremaine. 2004. Knowledge Worker Adoption
of Time Management Tools: Satisfaction and Perceived Effectiveness.
In AMCIS 2004 Proceedings. AISeL, New York, NY, USA, 433. https:
//aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2004/433

[55] Despoina Xanthopoulou, Arnold B. Bakker, Evangelia Demerouti, and
Wilmar B. Schaufeli. 2009. Work Engagement and Financial Returns:
A Diary Study on the Role of Job and Personal Resources. Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology 82, 1 (mar 2009), 183–200.
https://doi.org/10.1348/096317908X285633

CHI 2019 Paper CHI 2019, May 4–9, 2019, Glasgow, Scotland, UKPaper 615Page 12