Understanding My Data, Myself:  
Supporting Self-Reflection with Ubicomp Technologies 
Ian Li1, Anind K. Dey1, Jodi Forlizzi1,2 
1Human Computer Interaction Institute, 2School of Design 
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 
ianli@cmu.edu, {anind, forlizzi}@cs.cmu.edu 

ABSTRACT 
We live in a world where many kinds of data about us can 
be  collected  and  more  will  be  collected  as  Ubicomp 
technologies  mature.  People  reflect  on  this  data  using 
different  tools  for  personal  informatics.  However,  current 
tools  do  not  have  sufficient  understanding  of  users’  self-
reflection  needs 
leverage  Ubicomp 
to  appropriately 
technologies.  To  design  tools  that  effectively  assist  self-
reflection,  we  need  to  comprehensively  understand  what 
kinds  of  questions  people  have  about  their  data,  why  they 
ask  these  questions,  how  they  answer  them  with  current 
tools,  and  what  kinds  of  problems  they  encounter.  To 
explore this, we conducted interviews with people who use 
various  kinds  of  tools  for  personal  informatics.  We  found 
six  kinds  of  questions  that  people  asked  about  their  data. 
We  also  found  that  certain  kinds  of  questions  are  more 
important  at  certain  times,  which  we  call  phases.  We 
reflection:  Discovery  and 
identified 
Maintenance.  We  discuss  the  kinds  of  questions  and  the 
phases  in  detail  and  identify  features  that  should  be 
supported in personal informatics tools for which Ubicomp 
technologies can play an important role. 

two  phases  of 

Author Keywords 
Personal  informatics,  reflection,  phases,  discovery,  design 
features, visualizations 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H5.m.  Information  interfaces  and  presentation  (e.g.,  HCI): 
Miscellaneous. 

General Terms 
Design, Human Factors 

INTRODUCTION 
The abundance of computers, mobile devices, sensors, and 
access to information via the Internet enables the recording 
of  a  myriad  of  personal  data  (e.g.,  physiological  data, 
behaviors,  habits,  and  thoughts).  All  of  this  data  can  be 
used  for  self-reflection  to  help  people  become  more  aware 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
UbiComp’11, September 17–21, 2011, Beijing, China. 
Copyright 2011 ACM  978-1-4503-0630-0/11/09...$10.00. 

of  their  own  behavior  [5],  make  better  decisions  [8],  and 
change behavior in domains ranging from health to energy 
conservation  [7,28].  More  tools  are  being  developed  that 
people  use  for  personal  informatics,  which  help  people 
collect  and  reflect  on  personally  relevant  data  for  the 
purpose of self-knowledge [17]. Many Ubicomp tools have 
been  created  for  personal  informatics,  such  as  Fish'n'Steps 
[18], Ubigreen [10], and mobile apps for diabetes [24]. 

However, we believe current tools for personal informatics 
were  not  designed  with  sufficient  understanding  of  users’ 
self-reflection  needs.  For  example,  a  tool  might  show  the 
user’s  current  step  counts,  but  the  user  might  prefer  a 
historical view of her average step counts to inform her how 
to  increase  her  steps.  To  appropriately  design  these  tools, 
we  need  a  comprehensive  understanding  of  what  kinds  of 
questions people want to answer about their data, why they 
ask  these  questions,  how  they  answer  them  with  current 
tools, and what kinds of problems they encounter. By doing 
so,  developers  and  designers  can  better  take  advantage  of 
Ubicomp technologies to help users self-reflect. 

To explore these issues, we conducted a study in which we 
interviewed people who used tools for personal informatics. 
We identified six kinds of questions that people asked about 
their  data:  Status,  History,  Goals,  Discrepancies,  Context, 
and  Factors.  We  discuss  the  tools  that  people  used  to 
answer these kinds of questions and the problems that they 
encountered. We also discovered that people’s information 
needs  change,  which  we  called  phases  of  reflection: 
Discovery  and M aintenance.  These  phases  differ  by  how 
frequently people asked the different kinds of questions. An 
important  aspect  of  the  phases  is  that  people  transitioned 
between  them.  People  transitioned  from  Maintenance  to 
Discovery  when  they  were  unable  to  reach  their  goals  or 
when  they  had  to  redefine  their  goals  because  they 
experienced  a  new  set  of  problems.  On  the  other  hand, 
people  transitioned  from  Discovery  to  Maintenance  when 
they had identified their goal and had learned the steps they 
needed to take to achieve their goal. 

The importance of this work to Ubicomp is threefold. First, 
this  work  describes  the  kinds  of  questions  that  people  ask 
about  their  data,  which  suggests  how  data  should  be 
presented  to  inform  users  of  proper  actions  towards 
behavior  change.  Second,  this  work  identifies  features  that 
Ubicomp  tools  should  have,  so  that  users  can  get  the 

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China405 
 
 
information  they  need  to  make  better  decisions  towards 
behavior change. Lastly, this work describes how Ubicomp 
technologies can appropriately support people to answer the 
questions  they  ask  within  the  phases  and  help  them 
transition  between  the  phases.  This  work  shows  that 
Ubicomp technologies can play an important role in helping 
people  become  more  self-aware,  which  is  valuable  in 
making good decisions and changing behavior. 

This  paper  is  organized  in  the  following  manner.  First,  we 
discuss what we mean by personal informatics and discuss 
related  work  in  personal  informatics.  Second,  we  describe 
our  interviews,  which  explore  what  questions  people  ask 
about their data and how they answer these questions with 
current  tools.  We  then  discuss  our  findings:  the  six  main 
questions people asked about their data and the two phases 
of  reflection  that  they  transitioned  between.  We  present  a 
list  of  features  that  Ubicomp  tools  should  support  to  help 
users with reflection, and discuss their implications. 

Defining Personal Informatics 
We extend the definition of personal informatics [17] from 
a  class  of  tools  to  an  activity  where  people  collect  and 
reflect  on  personal  data  to  gain  a  better  understanding  of 
their own behavior. People can and will use almost any tool 
for  personal  informatics.  Tools  can  vary  by  form  factor 
(paper,  web  sites,  devices,  etc.)  and  level  of  support 
(manual  vs.  automated).  However,  the  limitations  of  tools 
the  activity  of  personal 
that  people  use  can  make 
[17]. 
informatics 
Therefore,  Ubicomp  technologies  have  an  opportunity  to 
assist the people in their personal informatics activity. 

time-consuming 

cumbersome 

and 

Data  for  personal  informatics  include  data  about  behavior 
(e.g.,  frequency  of  exercise)  and  physiology  (e.g.,  heart 
rate). They may include current and historical data and may 
be  quantitative  or  qualitative  (e.g.,  step  counts  vs.  moods). 
In  addition  to  personal  information,  external  data  can  be 
used when it is personally relevant, e.g., weather data might 
be  personally  relevant  if  the  user  is  interested  in  knowing 
how the weather affects her physical activity. 

As we will discuss later, our exploration found that people 
collected personal data for other reasons other than personal 
informatics, such as reminiscing about the past [21], aiding 
memory  [14],  and  personal  information  management  [16]. 
In this paper, we focus on collection of personal data for the 
purpose  of  gaining  insights  and  understanding  oneself. 
There  is  much  research  that  shows  that  reflection  plays  an 
important role in changing behaviors [see 7 for a review]. 

RELATED WORK 
This  work  builds  on  top  of  other  research  that  has  looked 
into investigating appropriate feedback for users. This paper 
focuses on supporting users' reflection needs, which is one 
of  the  stages  of  the  model  of  personal  informatics  systems 
[17]:  Preparation,  Collection,  Integration,  Reflection,  and 
Action.  The  model  describes  the  different  types  of  support 
that tools must provide to assist users through their personal 
informatics  activity.  The  model  also  highlights  that  the 

stages  are  inter-related,  i.e.,  problems  from  the  earlier 
stages affect the later stages. This implies that the person's 
ability to reflect on her data and the value of the reflection 
are  affected  by  how  and  what  data  she  collects.  Thus,  the 
support 
in 
improving how data is collected and in increasing the types 
of data that can be collected can help with self-reflection. 

technologies  can  provide 

that  Ubicomp 

Related  to  the  PI  model  is  the  Transtheoretical  Model  of 
Behavior  Change  (TTM)  [25],  which  also  consists  of  five 
stages:  Precontemplation,  Contemplation,  Preparation, 
Action,  and  Maintenance.  Unlike  the  PI  model,  which 
describes  the  different  types  of  support  needed  to  assist 
personal informatics activities, the TTM describes people’s 
different 
to  change 
levels  of  motivation  and  ability 
behavior. The TTM is used to classify people’s readiness to 
change behavior, which is useful for tailoring interventions, 
such  as,  designing  feedback  to  encourage  environmentally 
friendly  behavior  [13].  Others  have  also  explored  other 
behavioral  theories.  Consolvo  and  colleagues  used  various 
psychological theories to describe eight design strategies to 
support  behavior  change  [6].  Froehlich  and  colleagues 
described  different  ways  of  designing  eco-feedback 
technologies [10]. While these models suggest the need for 
Ubicomp technologies, they do not define how tools should 
be designed based on people’s changing information needs 
when engaging in personal informatics activities. 

There  is  plenty  of  research  on  effective  information 
visualization  techniques  to  explore  data  for  insights  [see  4 
for  an  extensive  review],  but  they  are  not  all  focused  on 
personal  data.    Some  projects  have  applied  exploration 
techniques on personal data. For example, Frost and Smith 
used  visualizations  to  help  diabetic  patients  explore  the 
relationship between their blood glucose level and the types 
of food they consumed [11]. Commercial products, such as 
Mint (expenditures), Nike+ (physical activity), and Wattson 
(electricity), use information visualizations to assist users in 
trends.  Some 
exploring 
information  visualizations,  such  as  ambient  displays  [22], 
glanceable  displays  [19],  and  information  art  [20],  are  less 
focused  on  exploration  of  historical  information.  Instead, 
they increase awareness of one’s current status (e.g., you’ve 
got  mail,  your  stock  portfolio  is  currently  up,  your  bus  is 
arriving)  while  minimizing  cognitive  load.  This  work 
explores how people use these existing tools to answer their 
they 
questions  about 
encounter. We use this exploration to define users’ specific 
information  needs  and 
to  describe  how  Ubicomp 
technologies can provide support. 

themselves  and  what  problems 

their  data  for  patterns  and 

In  the  next  section,  we  describe  our  interviews  of  people 
who  used  tools  for  personal  informatics.  We  analyzed  the 
responses  for  the  kinds  of  questions  they  asked  and  how 
they used existing tools to answer them. 

INTERVIEWS 
The goal of the interviews was to study how people explore 
and reflect on the data they collect for personal informatics. 

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China406 
We  conducted  interviews  with  people  who  were  already 
self-tracking  and  reflecting  on  collected  data.  This  helped 
us see behavior in a natural setting where people’s routines 
around  tracking  and  reflecting  were  focused  on  their  own 
needs,  rather  than  forcing  people  to  use  a  system  we 
designed.  In  the  following  sections,  we  describe  how  we 
recruited participants and conducted the interviews. 

Recruitment 
We  advertised  the  study  on  Craigslist,  the  Quantified  Self 
blog,  and  a  campus  recruiting  web  site.  The  recruitment 
letter  stated  that  we  were  looking  for  users  of  self-
tracking/personal  informatics  tools,  such  as  Mint,  Nike+, 
MoodJam,  etc.  People  interested  in  the  study  completed  a 
pre-questionnaire that asked what type of data they collect, 
for  how  long,  and  contact  information.  They  had  to  be 
currently  using  a  tool  for  personal  informatics  and  must 
have  used  it  for  a  month  or  more.  We  recruited  a  diverse 
group of people from around the nation and our city. Given 
that  we  were  only  going  to  be  able  to  talk  to  a  limited 
number  of  people,  the  pre-questionnaire  helped  us  ensure 
that we recruited a set of participants using a range of tools 
for a range of types of data. 

91  people  responded  to  the  pre-questionnaire  (local:  76, 
remote:  15).  We  selected  15  people  (P1-P15)  from  all  the 
respondents  to  participate  in  the  study.  Ten  lived  locally 
within the city limits and five lived remotely. A third were 
male (5 vs. 10 females). The age ranges and their respective 
counts  were  20-25  (6),  25-30  (4),  30-35  (1),  and  over  50 
(4).  Additionally,  half  were  professionals  (8)  and  the  rest 
were students (graduate: 4, undergraduate: 3). 

Procedure 
We  invited  participants  for  a  one-hour  interview  in  either 
our  lab  or  over  Skype,  depending  on  whether  they  lived 
locally  or  remotely.  Local  participants  were  required  to 
bring  the  tools  they  used  for  personal  informatics  (e.g., 
laptop,  devices,  notebooks)  to  the  interview.  Remote 
participants  used  Skype's  Screen  Sharing  and  Video 
features to show us the tools they used. 

the 

interview,  we 

the  beginning  of 

their  general  personal 

At 
introduced 
participants  to  the  study.  Participants  signed  the  study 
consent  form  and  completed  an  online  survey  that  asked 
informatics  usage.  The 
about 
questionnaire 
the  survey 
is  a  condensed  version  of 
described  in  [17].  We  sat  with  the  participants  in  front  of 
their  laptop  or  mobile  phone  and  asked  them  to  describe 
their  general  usage.  We  observed  participants  as  they  used 
their tools. We asked them how they reflected on their data 
and  to  show  us  how  they  reviewed  their  data:  What  were 
they  looking  for?  What  questions  did  they  have?  Why  did 
they  ask  these  questions?  How  did  they  answer  their 
questions  using  their  tools?  What  problems  did  they 
experience while trying to answer their questions? 

Participants  were  compensated  $10  (in  cash  or  as  Amazon 
gift  certificates)  for  the  one  hour  they  spent  with  us.  The 
interviews were videotaped. 

RESULTS 
We  transcribed  the  interview  recordings.  We  analyzed  the 
interviews by coding the responses line by line. We did not 
have  a  pre-determined  coding  scheme  before  the  analysis. 
Instead, we identified themes from the data as we processed 
the  responses.  The  themes  emerged  after  we  organized  the 
codes  using  affinity  diagrams.  During  the  analysis,  we 
focused on the reasons people reflected on their data, what 
questions people were trying to answer when reflecting on 
their  data,  how  the  tools  they  used  supported  or  prevented 
finding  answers  to  their  questions),  and  what  design 
features  in  the  tools  they  used  supported  their  personal 
informatics activity. 

they  collected.  The  primary  data 

Participant Information 
To  help  focus  our  interviews,  we  asked  participants  to 
describe  the  primary  data  about  themselves  that  they 
collected  [Table  1].  The  participants  varied  in  the  types  of 
information 
that 
participants collected were: financial expenditures (3), sleep 
(3),  weight  (2),  blood  glucose  level  (2),  exercise  (1), 
productivity  (1),  web  history  (1),  books  read  (1),  and  life 
events  (1).  Half  of  the  participants  collected  one  or  more 
types  of  data.  For  example,  P7,  who  collected  the  widest 
variety of data, used Daytum and your.flowingdata to track 
television  shows  and  movies  that  she  watched,  restaurants 
she dined at, and places she visited. She recorded her eating 
habits with DailyBurn. Because of periods of insomnia, she 
used Fitbit to record her sleep patterns and physical activity 
levels. She also complemented her sleep tracking by taking 
notes about the quality of her sleep in YawnLog. There was 
also  a  diversity  of  experiences  in  self-tracking.  Four 
participants  had  been  self-tracking  for  a  month  or  two; 
seven participants, for a year or two; and three participants, 
for  more  than  three  years.  P3,  who  has  diabetes,  had  been 
tracking  her  blood  glucose  level  for  15  years.  For  several 
years,  she  used  a  fingerstick  blood  glucose  meter  that 
required  piercing  the  skin  to  draw  blood  3  to  10  times  a 
day.  In  the  past  year,  she  started  using  a  Dexcom  device, 
which  has  a  sensor 
the  body  and 
continuously takes blood glucose readings very 5 minutes. 

that  adheres 

to 

ID 
P1 
P2 
P3 
P4 
P5 
P6 
P7 
P8 
P9 
P10 
P11 
P12 
P13 
P14 
P15 

Primary Data 
expenses 
weight 
blood glucose 
exercise 
expenses 
blood glucose 
sleep 
sleep 
sleep 
life events 
weight 
expenses 
productivity 
web history 
books 

Multiple Types?  Reason 
No 
Yes 
Was 
Was 
Yes 
Was 
Was 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
Was 
No 
No 
No 
No 

Behavior Change 
Behavior Change 
Behavior Change 
Behavior Change 
Behavior Change 
Behavior Change 
Behavior Change 
Behavior Change 
Behavior Change 
Reminiscence 
Behavior Change 
Coordination 
Behavior Change 
Retrieval 
Sharing 

Table 1. The participants, their primary data, whether they 
collected multiple types of data, and their reasons for collection.  

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China407Reasons 
Participants  cited  different  reasons  for  collecting  personal 
data. Many participants (11 out of 15) self-tracked to reflect 
on  the  data,  because  they  wanted  to  change  or  maintain  a 
behavior. For example, P1 used Mint to maintain a budget 
after  moving  to  a  new  city.  P8  tracked  her  sleep  patterns 
and various factors that might affect the quality of her sleep 
using  the  Sleeptracker  watch  and  laptop  application.  Four 
participants collected data for other uses. P14 collected his 
web  history  with  Google  Web  History  for  later  retrieval. 
P15 collected book information in GoodReads to share with 
other  people.  P12  recorded  his  grocery  and  utility 
expenditures  in  Buxfer  to  easily  coordinate  expenses  with 
his  roommates.  P10  wrote  about  life  events  in  online 
journals 
four 
participants'  usage  of  personal  informatics  tools  is  more 
closely  in  line  with  other  types  of  applications  (in  order): 
personal 
information  management,  social  networking, 
coordination,  and  reminiscence.  In  the  following  section, 
we focus our discussion on the 11 participants who wanted 
to  change  or  maintain  their  behavior,  because  personal 
informatics  tools  are  useful  when  they  help  people  gain 
self-knowledge  that  improves  decision-making  and  assists 
in behavior change.  

to  better  remember  her  past.  These 

QUESTIONS 
In  this  section,  we  discuss  the  6  kinds  of  questions  that 
people  asked  about  their  personal  information:  Status, 
History,  Goals,  Discrepancies,  Context,  and  Factors.  We 
describe  in  detail  what  participants  were  looking  for  and 
how they answered their questions. 

Status 
People  were  interested  in  data  that  revealed  their  current 
status.  For  example,  P7  checked  her  Fitbit  device  several 
times a day to determine her current physical activity level. 
Checking one’s status doesn’t have to happen several times 
a  day;  P5  checked  her  finances  using  Mint  and  her  bank 
web site at the end of each day. 

People  also  checked  their  current  status  to  determine 
whether  they  were  meeting  their  goal  and  whether  they 
should  act  to  correct  their  behavior.  For  example,  P7 
checked  her  step  count  to  determine  whether  she  took 
enough  steps  for  the  day.  If  not,  she  would  go  out  for  a 
walk.  P5  checked  her  finances  to  make  sure  that  she  is 
staying  within  her  daily  budget.  If  not,  she  tried  to  spend 
less the subsequent days. 

How often people checked their status is dependent on what 
kind of data they were tracking and how they were tracking 
it.  For  example,  P3  and  P6  have  diabetes,  and  used  blood 
glucose  meters  to  measure  their  current  blood  sugar  level. 
P3 wore a Dexcom continuous blood glucose meter, which 
measured  her  blood  glucose 
level  every  5  minutes. 
However,  P6  used  a  fingerstick  device,  so  he  could  only 
check 3 to 6 times a day. 

For some kinds of data, participants did not use a device to 
measure  their  current  status;  instead,  they  used  their  own 

senses.  For  example,  P9  who  was  interested  in  her  sleep 
quality  recorded  the  quality  of  her  sleep  and  whether  leg 
cramps  occurred.  P8  used  the  SleepTracker  watch  to 
measure  her  sleep,  but  she  used  her  senses  to  record 
information related to sleep, such as mood and stress. 

History 
Beyond  looking  at  one’s  current  status,  participants  were 
also  interested  in  seeing  their  data  over  the  long  term. 
Instead  of  looking  at  one  piece  of  data  or  a  short  time’s 
worth of data (an hour to a day), people wanted to see their 
data  over  a  long  range  to  find  trends  and  patterns.  Trends 
(whether  the  data  is  going  up,  going  down,  or  remaining 
steady) are especially important to figure out whether they 
are making progress towards a particular goal. For example, 
P4  looked  for  trends  in  her  physical  activity  data  to  make 
sure  that  she  was  maintaining  her  goal  of  regular  physical 
activity over a long period of time. P5 also looked at trends 
to  make  sure 
that  she  was  reducing  her  monthly 
expenditures to save for a trip abroad. 

People  experienced  different  kinds  of  problems 
in 
understanding their history. One problem is that the ability 
to  see  trends  and  patterns  largely  depends  on  having 
collected data over a long period of time. Thus, the person 
has  to  first  put  in  the  effort  of  collecting  data  before  the 
value of the data becomes evident. For example, P5 started 
using  Mint  when  her  mom  introduced  her  to  the  site.  She 
could  not  make  any  significant  conclusions  regarding  her 
spending  trends  because  she  had  only  been  collecting  data 
for a month prior to the interview. Another problem is that 
tools  do  not  provide  adequate  support  to  allow  reflection 
over  the  long  term.    P8  experienced  this  problem  with  the 
SleepTracker  watch,  which  she  had  been  using  for  several 
months.  The  watch  had  a  desktop  interface  to  review  her 
past  history.  However,  the  software  just  listed  her  sleep 
quantity  on  a  spreadsheet-like  interface,  which  made  it 
difficult  to  see  trends.  She  said  a  simple  bar  graph  would 
have been helpful.  

A  related  question  is:  how  does  data  from  one  time  range 
compare  with  another?  Viewing  one's  data  over  a  long 
period  of  time  allows  the  person  to  answer  this  question. 
For  example,  P1  compared  her  spending  between  two 
different  months.  She  was  particularly  interested  in  seeing 
how her recent move affected her spending. 

Goal 
In addition to wanting to know their status and their history, 
people  also  wanted  to  figure  out  what  goals  would  be 
appropriate  to  pursue.  Sometimes,  people  started  self-
tracking  without  knowing  their  goal  and  they  used  self-
tracking  as  way  to  1)  determine  what  actions  they  should 
take  to  fix  a  problem  or  2)  establish  a  “baseline”  of  their 
activities to determine whether they have a problem.  

Before  we  go  into  detail  about  this  question,  we  need  to 
define what kind of goals we are talking about, because the 
distinction  between 
is 
important.  Powers  [23]  described  goals  as  a  hierarchical 

the  different  kinds  of  goals 

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China408 
structure  ranging  from  abstract  to  more  specific.  The  four 
levels  are  system  concept,  principle,  program,  and 
sequence. The system-concept goal refers to the sense of an 
idealized  self,  an  idealized  relationship,  or  an  idealized 
society,  and,  as  such,  is  very  abstract.  The  next  level  of 
goals is the principle level, which refers to the set of goals 
(or guiding principles) that one tries to achieve to reach an 
ideal.  Some  examples  of  principle-level  goals  are:  be 
physically  fit,  be  thrifty,  and  be  productive.  This  level  is 
still quite abstract; a person does not just become physically 
fit or thrifty or productive, one has to exhibit such qualities 
by  doing  specific  activities  or  programs  [26].  Some 
example of program-level goals are: 1) running three times 
a week to become physically fit; 2) spending money within 
a  budget  to  become  thrifty;  and  3)  minimizing  the  amount 
of  time  spent  browsing  social  media  websites  to  become 
productive. To perform a program-level goal, a person does 
sequences  of  specific  actions.  For  example,  the  sequence-
level  goals  to  complete  the  goal  of  running  three  times  a 
week  may  consist  of  putting  on  shoes,  going  outside, 
running a specified route, etc. 

In  the  rest  of  this  paper,  we  are  talking  about  “program-
level goals” when we refer to “goals”. Program-level goals 
are  more  specific  than  principle-  or  system-concept  level 
goals, so they are more actionable or more ready to be acted 
upon.  We  found  that  people  use  personal  informatics  tools 
to  help  them  set  and  complete  program-level  goals.  For 
example,  P4  used  SparkPeople  because  she  wanted  to 
become physically fit (principle-level goal), but the value of 
the 
in 
accomplishing her program-level goals: running three times 
per week and eating within a specified amount of calories. 

track  her  progress 

in  helping  her 

tool  was 

Knowing one’s goals had an effect on the number of kinds 
of  data  the  participants  collected.  For  example,  P9  had 
problems sleeping because of her leg cramps. She wanted to 
address  the  problem  to  improve  her  sleep  (principle-level 
goal),  but  she  did  not  know  what  caused  her  leg  cramps. 
She tracked what she ate and her physical activity to see if 
these  were  causing  the  leg  cramps,  so  she  could  make 
program-level  goals,  such  as  “avoid  X  kind  of  food”  or 
“don’t do physical activity X hours before sleeping.” 

Once participants identified their program-level goals, they 
changed their data collection habits. For example, when P3 
was  diagnosed  with  diabetes,  she  did  not  know  the 
appropriate  program-level  goals  to  manage  her  diabetes, 
such as what specific foods to avoid, how active she could 
be, etc. To figure out her goals, she collected multiple kinds 
of data: what she ate, what physical activity she did, as well 
as  her  blood  sugar  level.  She  is  a  “brittle  diabetic”  (her 
blood  sugar  fluctuates  to  dangerous  levels  quickly),  so 
figuring  out  the  effects  of  food  and  physical  activity  was 
critical, but difficult to do. She did this for two years until 
she  understood  her  blood  sugar  fluctuations  better  and  she 
was able to set appropriate food and physical activity goals. 
When this happened, she stopped collecting the other pieces 
of  data  because  she  already  knew  their  effects.  She  still 

tracks her blood sugar level, but she just takes mental notes 
of the meal, physical activity, and sleep quality prior to her 
blood sugar level measurement. 

Discrepancies 
Once  people  know  their  goal,  they  compare  their  current 
status  with  their  goal  [5].  We  also  observed  this  in  our 
interviews.  Participants  checked  their  current  status  then 
compared  it  with  their  goal:  Is  there  a  difference  between 
my current status and my goal? How big is the difference? 
And  what  should  I  do  to  reduce  the  difference?  For 
example,  P4  wanted  to  become  more  physically  active,  so 
she  set  a  goal  of  exercising  every  other  day  or  about  three 
times  a  week.  She  looked  at  her  weekly  physical  activity 
using  SparkPeople.    She  checked  how  much  her  current 
status differed from the goal. When she found a difference, 
she  modified  her  schedule  to  compensate  for  her  missed 
physical  activity.  Also,  how  participants  addressed 
discrepancies changed over time. At the beginning, P4 was 
very  strict  at  meeting  her  goals,  so  she  immediately 
addressed  missing  her  goal  by  exercising  the  same  day.  A 
year  after  her  physical  activity  tracking  she  became  less 
strict  about  meeting  her  goal.  She  allowed  herself  to  miss 
days, and instead of exercising immediately, she postponed 
physical  activity  until  the  end  of  the  week  when  she  had 
more  time.  Another  example  is  P11  who  compared  her 
daily food consumption with a range of calories, a goal that 
she  had  set  in  the  DailyPlate  tool.  Every  day  she  checked 
whether  she  was  within  the  range  of  her  allotted  daily 
consumption.  When  her  consumption  was  below  her  goal, 
she  increased  her  consumption  for  that  day.  If  she  was 
within range, she made sure that she did not go over. Both 
P4  and  P11  found  that  comparing  their  current  status  with 
their goal helped them make immediate decisions to address 
any differences. If they were meeting their goal, they could 
focus on maintaining it. 

A problem with this question is that it is largely dependent 
on  knowing  what  the  program-level  goal  is.  If  the  goal  is 
undefined,  the  person  cannot  act  on  fixing  their  problem. 
This  is  what  happened  with  P9.  She  knew  her  principle-
level  goal:  fix  her  leg  cramps  when  she  goes  to  sleep. 
Unfortunately, she did not understand the causes of her leg 
cramps well enough to set appropriate program-level goals, 
such as avoiding certain foods or certain physical activity. 

Context 
things  were 
Participants  also  wondered  what  other 
happening  at  or  near  the  same  time  as  their  current 
information-seeking context. They were curious about how 
other  events  may  explain  what  was  happening  to  them  in 
the present. For example, P3 kept in mind other events at or 
near the time she checked her blood sugar level (e.g., what 
she ate, what physical activity she did), so she could act on 
problems  appropriately.  P6  noted  his  current  mood  and 
stress  level  along  with  his  blood  sugar  level.  He  thought 
that his blood sugar level might explain how he was feeling. 

How participants answered this question was dependent on 
their  access  to  additional  data.  Some  people  depended  on 

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China409other  devices.  For  example,  P6  used  Fitbit  and  Zeo  to 
automatically record his physical activity and sleep quality. 
He  used  the  data  from  these  devices  to  figure  out  the 
relationship of his physical activity and sleep with his blood 
sugar level. Some people used written notes (on paper or a 
web  site)  to  remind  themselves  of  other  events  that 
happened  at  a  particular  time.  P8  used  the  annotation 
feature  in  the  SleepTracker  software  to  record  her  mood, 
stress  level,  and  caffeine  intake,  which  may  be  related  to 
her  sleep  quality.  P5  kept  a  journal  of  her  activities  to 
remind  her  of  what  she  did  when  she  spent  her  money. 
Sometimes,  people  just  depended  on  their  memory  to 
remind them of what happened. For example, P4 diligently 
recorded her data at the start of her self-tracking, but after a 
while  she  just  used  her  memory.  She  explained,  “I  just 
depend  on  my  memory…I  didn’t  want  to  become,  like, 
OCD  (obsessive-compulsive)  about  it.”  However,  one 
problem with dependence on memory is that one's memory 
of events can be unreliable and degrades over time. 

Factors 
Unlike the previous question, which asks what influences a 
person’s  current  status,  this  question  asks  what  influences 
behavior over a long period of time. Factors collected over 
time  help  to  identify  and  monitor  trends.  For  example,  P4 
was curious how her physical activity and nutrition affected 
her overall health over a long period of time.  

this  goal,  she 

tracked  several 

Participants  were  interested  in  how  other  factors  may  be 
affecting their behavior. For example, it is not sufficient to 
say  that  one  wants  to  lose  weight;  it  is  important  to  know 
how  one’s  physical  activity  level  and  food  consumption 
affect one’s weight. By knowing the factors, people can act 
on those factors to change their behavior. This is especially 
important  when  other  things  could  cause  the  behavior.  For 
example,  P2  was  interested  in  losing  weight.  To  help  her 
accomplish 
types  of 
information  in  addition  to  her  weight:  exercises  she  did, 
what  she  ate,  total  calories,  and  water  drank.  She  used  the 
CalorieTracker  Android  app  to  help  her  compute  the 
calories  of  her  food  and  DailyPlate  to  store  all  the  data 
online. She used the DailyPlate graphs and charts to see the 
trends  in  her  weight  and  how  they  were  affected  by  other 
factors.  When  her  weight  went  up,  she  reduced  her  food 
intake  and  increased  her  physical  activity.  She  also  made 
sure  that  her  weight  went  down  at  a  “healthy  rate  of 
decline”,  so  that  she  lost  weight  in  a  healthy  way.  P2  also 
wrote in a journal to record her goals and how she felt about 
her  progress.  She  said,  “I  look  for  things  that  I  have  done 
well. Places where I might have made a misstep, either I’ve 
done  too  much  exercise  in  one  day  or  I’ve  done  too  little. 
Or maybe I didn’t meet all of my exchanges or maybe I met 
all of my exchanges, calorie-wise.” 

One problem with this kind of question is that a tool did not 
exist  that  could  help  users  explore  their  data  holistically. 
Instead,  they  had  to  look  at  their  data  one  at  a  time.  Even 
when data was stored in the same tool, they had to look at 
different  graphs  separately  (e.g.,  Daytum).  Using  different 

tools  for  different  types  of  data  exacerbated  this  problem. 
For  example,  P6  used  Fitbit  for  physical  activity  and  Zeo 
for  sleep  and  there  was  not  an  easy  way  to  look  at  these 
data  together.  P7  used  Fitbit  for  both  sleep  and  physical 
activity  tracking,  so  she  was  able  to  explore  both  types  of 
data  together.  However,  she  also  collected  other  types  of 
data  using  Daytum  and  your.flowingdata,  which  she  could 
not  easily  review  along  with  her  Fitbit  data.  Some 
participants managed to explore their data together by using 
paper  graphs  (P9  and  P6)  or  by  painstakingly  reviewing 
logs  of  their  data  (P2  and  P8).  However,  participants 
experienced other setbacks: exploring multiple types of data 
was  confusing  and  understanding  the  influences  of  the 
factors on their behavior was difficult. 

PHASES OF REFLECTION 
We  noticed  that  participants  asked  some  questions  more 
often  than  others  at  different  times.  We  analyzed  our  data 
further  by  looking  at  when  participants  asked  certain 
questions.  We 
two  distinct  phases  when 
participants  asked  different  sets  of  questions:  Maintenance 
and  Discovery.  We  also  found  that  participants  did  not 
remain in one phase; instead they transitioned between the 
two.  We  discuss  the  properties  of  each  phase  and  the 
transitions between the phases in the next sections. 

identified 

Maintenance Phase 
The Maintenance phase is marked with participants mostly 
asking  Status  and  Discrepancy  questions.  In  this  phase, 
participants used their collected data to maintain awareness 
of  their  status  relative  to  a  goal  and  to  maintain  their 
behavior. When in the Maintenance phase, participants can 
be characterized in the following way: 1) they already knew 
the  goal  they  were  trying  to  meet  and  2)  they  have 
identified how different factors affected their behavior. We 
describe each of these characteristics below. 

in 

Participants 
the  Maintenance  phase  have  already 
identified their program-level goals. In this phase, they self-
track  to  determine  whether  their  current  actions  are  in  line 
with  their  goals.  P13  wanted  to  be  more  productive 
(principle-level  goal),  and  had  already  determined  his 
program-level goal: limit his visits to social media websites 
to 20 minutes a day. While his StayFocusd Chrome browser 
extension  stored  his  total  web  site  visit  times  over  a  week 
and  a  month,  he  did  not  look  at  those  numbers;  he  just 
needed  the  tool  to  alert  him  when  he  went  above  his  goal. 
P1 used Mint to keep track of her expenditures to make sure 
that she is meeting several budgets that she had already set 
for  various  categories  of  expenditures  (program-level 
goals). When she showed us her Mint account, she had set 
budgets for 14 categories!  

Also,  participants  in  the  Maintenance  phase  already  knew 
the  relationships  between  their  behavior  and  factors  that 
affect their behavior. They collected information about their 
behavior; they did not collect other types of data that might 
affect their behavior because they were not useful anymore. 
For example, P13 just tracked the minutes that he spent on 
Facebook, Twitter, and other social media sites, because he 

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China410 
already  knew  how  browsing  such  web  sites  affected  his 
productivity. He did not track other factors that might affect 
his  productivity  (e.g.,  sleep  quality,  interruptions).  P1  did 
not use the exploratory tools within Mint to see how much 
she  had  spent  on  different  categories  and  what  she 
purchased.  Instead,  she  primarily  used  the main  screen  
where  her  budget  was  prominently  displayed  to  check 
whether she was within her monthly budget. 

During  the  Maintenance  phase,  participants  only  tracked 
one or a few types of data. They have already defined their 
goal  and  were  collecting  just  enough  information  that 
would  allow  them  to  tell  whether  they  were  meeting  their 
goal.  For  example,  P1  and  P5  only  reflected  on  their 
expenses and P13, on his productivity. 

in 

Discovery Phase 
The  Discovery  phase  is  marked  with  participants  mostly 
asking  History,  Goals,  Context,  and  Factors  questions. 
When 
the  Discovery  phase,  participants  can  be 
characterized  in  the  following  way:  1)  they  did  not  know 
the  goal  they  were  trying  to  meet  and/or  2)  they  have  not 
identified  the  factors  that  influenced  their  behavior.  We 
describe each of these characteristics below. 

Participants  in  the  Discovery  phase  were  still  trying  to 
figure  out  what  their  program-level  goals  were.  When  P3 
was newly diagnosed with diabetes, she knew that she had 
to  manage  her  blood  sugar  level  (principle-level  goal),  but 
she did not know specifically what kinds of foods to avoid 
or how much physical activity she could perform (program-
level goals). P8 tracked the quality of her sleep so that she 
feels  better  rested  (principle-level  goal).  She  explored  her 
sleep  data  to  “spot  trends  for  which  I  can  take  corrective 
action.” She wanted to figure out the specific program-level 
goals  that  would  improve  her  sleep  quality,  such  as  eating 
dinner earlier or refraining from coffee or alcohol. She also 
added  that  she  was  “trying  to  take  a  long-term  view”,  so 
that the solution is “not a quick-fix approach.” 

Also, participants in the Discovery phase did not know how 
different  factors  affected  their  behavior.  Because  of  this 
lack of knowledge, participants collected different types of 
data,  so  they  could  figure  out  the  correlations  between 
them.  P3  tracked  food  consumption  and  physical  activity 
along with her blood glucose levels because she wanted to 
figure  out  how  her  eating  and  exercise  habits  affected  the 
fluctuations  in  her  blood  glucose  level.  P9  had  leg  cramps 
while  sleeping.  She  had  several  hypotheses  about  what 
caused  her  leg  cramps.  She  talked  to  her  doctor  who  said 
the leg cramps might be due to an electrolyte imbalance, so 
she tracked the types of food she ate. She also used FitBit to 
see  if  her  amount  of  physical  activity  had  an  effect  on  the 
occurrence of her leg cramps. 

Transitions Between Phases 
We found in our interviews that people did not stay in one 
phase;  instead,  they  transitioned  between  the  two  phases. 
Several participants who were in the Maintenance phase at 
the  time  of  the  interviews  were  in  the  Discovery  phase 

earlier in their self-tracking regimen. P6 initially tracked his 
blood sugar level, his food consumption, and mood until he 
found  that  “it  turns  out  one  of  the  things  I  do  to  manage 
stress is eat something, because blood sugar feels good. So 
if  things  are  unsettled  or  high  pressure,  eating  something 
feels good.” P6 described his transition to gaining control of 
his diabetes, “In the initial phase, three and a half years ago, 
over about six months, I learned to control my blood sugar 
down  to  a  level  from  300  to  about  180.  Then  I  escaped 
there  and  measurement  became  less  interesting  because 
there was no progress to be made; it was steady state stuff.” 
P3  had  a  similar  experience  in  dealing  with  her  diabetes. 
She  said,  “When  I  first  became  diabetic,  I  needed  to  keep 
track  of  everything.  At  this  point  in  my  life,  I've  had 
diabetes for about 15 years, and I no longer write anything 
down.”  Now,  she  just  wears  a  continuous  blood  glucose 
monitoring device to alert her whether her blood glucose is 
too  high  or  too  low.  Her  reason  for  transitioning  was  two-
fold:  1)  tracking  all  the  information  “would  be  onerous” 
and 2) “it wasn’t helping me anymore. I was remembering. 
Not the exact numbers, but I was remembering trends.” 

P4  tracked  her  physical  activity  and  food  consumption 
diligently  at  the  beginning,  but  became  more  lax  later  and 
did not track her food consumption. She said, “I feel like I 
have  a  handle  on  it.  I  have  accomplished  the  goals  of 
creating a healthy lifestyle for myself. As long as I stay like 
this I'm good. It's more maintenance.” She still kept track of 
her  physical  activity,  but  for  her  food  tracking,  she  just 
“keeps  a  mental  note  of  it  and  just  overall  have  become 
more self aware of what I eat and stuff.” 

Sometimes  people  have  difficulty  transitioning  to  the 
they  could  not  find  an 
Maintenance  phase  because 
actionable  goal.  P9  described  that  she  still  did  not  know 
what  caused  the  leg  cramps  when  she  sleeps.  She  said, 
“They’re  not  completely  gone,  but  they’re  not  as  bad  as 
they  were.  But  I  still  don’t  know  exactly  what’s  caused 
them.”  She  added  that  she  still  recorded  the  recurrence  of 
the leg cramps, “It may always be sort of a mystery, and so 
I still have data for every night I’ve had leg cramps.” 

All  the  participants  who  were  in  the  Maintenance  phase  at 
the time of the study described anecdotes when they might 
go back to the Discovery phase. For example, while looking 
at her budget, P1 saw that she made a purchase of $24 for a 
gift and she asked herself, “What was that?” She said since 
she  did  not  remember,  she  explored  her  data  to  find  an 
explanation.  Since  Mint  provided  enough  detail  about  her 
purchases,  she  easily  found  that  the  gifts  were  bought  at  a 
local mall, which reminded her that she recently purchased 
a  gift  for  a  friend  there.  Sometimes  the  explanatory  data 
was  not  immediately  available,  so  the  participant  had  to 
restart  data  collection  of  influencing  factors.  For  example, 
P7  who  had  recurrent  insomnia  tracked  her  sleep  using 
FitBit. Patterns of insomnia or weird dreams would appear 
intermittently  and  she  would  again  note  factors  that  may 
have caused the problem.  

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China411FEATURES 
We have identified the questions that people asked and the 
phases  in  which  people  asked  these  different  questions. 
Now,  we  discuss  the  features  that  should  be  supported  in 
building  personal  informatics  tools  and  how  Ubicomp 
technologies  can  help.  We  also  describe  opportunities  for 
Ubicomp to explore. 

Supporting the Maintenance Phase 
Supporting the Maintenance Phase is not as difficult as the 
Discovery  phase  because  many  personal  informatics  tools 
the  user’s  current  status. 
already  support  collecting 
Additionally,  if  a  Ubicomp  technology  can  sense  simple 
things  about  a  user’s  behavior,  it  is  not  difficult  to  display 
the  information  back  to  the  user.  However,  there  are  some 
opportunities to better support the Maintenance phase. 

Alert the user when they are not meeting their goal 
During  the  Maintenance  phase,  it  is  possible  for  a  user  to 
know how to fix their problem, but still not fix the problem. 
For example, a pedometer user may know that they can get 
plenty of steps while walking their dog at the park, but the 
user may still not consistently walk their dog. In cases like 
this,  feedback  about  progress  towards  goals  can  have  a 
positive  effect  on  self-efficacy  and  achievement	  [27]. 
Additionally, Ubicomp technologies can help by identifying 
whether  the  user  is  meeting  their  goal.  Because  alerts  can 
sometimes  be  unwelcome,  Ubicomp  technologies,  such  as 
just-in-time 
the 
opportune time to alert the user of discrepancies. 

[15],  can  help  determine 

feedback 

Participants  were  more  interested  in  their  current  status 
during  the  Maintenance  phase  compared  to  during  the 
Discovery  phase.  Most  tools  for  personal  informatics  have 
daily  reminders  of  the  user’s  current  status,  but  this  may 
become  bothersome  if  the  status  is  the  same  as  the  past 
several  days.  Instead,  tools  should  reserve  alerts  for  when 
special  circumstances  arise  (e.g.,  the  user’s  step  counts 
changed  significantly).  Tools  can  better  support  this  by 
giving users control of when they are alerted. 

Assist the user when they don't meet their goal 
The phases of reflection do not address the question of how 
users  could  act  on  their  newfound  insights  to  change  their 
behavior. Thus, it is possible for a user in the Maintenance 
phase  to  still  not  meet  their  goal.	  When  the  user  does  not 
meet  her  goal,  the  tool  can  be  proactive  in  assisting  her  in 
resolving  the  problem.  One  idea  is  to  analyze  the  user’s 
history to create suggestions for resolution. For example, an 
automated  analysis  can  reveal  the  causes  of  the  problem. 
The tool can say “when you drink coffee at 6pm, you have 
a  hard  time  sleeping,  so  avoid  drinking  coffee  at  6pm”. 
Automated analysis can also remind users of what they did 
before to resolve the problem. For example, “last time when 
you  weren’t  being  active  you  were  sitting  on  the  couch 
watching TV. During the other times you were active, you 
decided to walk your dog around the neighborhood.” 

Supporting the Discovery Phase 
There  are  many  opportunities  for  support  in  the  Discovery 
phase  because  1)  there  are  many  questions  that  are  asked 
during this phase; 2) some questions require data collected 
over  a  long  time;  and  3)  some  questions  can  be  answered 
using multiple types of data. 

Collect data anytime, anywhere, and often 
People in the Discovery phase try to better understand their 
behavior  by  collecting  sufficient  data  to  yield  insights 
during  reflection.  Getting  sufficient  data  may  require 
tracking over a long period of time, over different contexts, 
and with great frequency. For example, understanding how 
one’s  environment  affects  physical  activity  may  require 
tracking  over  a  couple  of  weeks,  at  multiple  locations, 
throughout  the  day.  Many  barriers  to  personal  informatics 
[17]. 
are  associated 
Automated  data  capture  as  exemplified  by  many  Ubicomp 
technologies  (e.g.,  [1,12])  can  reduce  this  burden  by 
automating the data collection and storing large amounts of 
data  about  the  user.  By  reducing  the  burden  of  data 
collection, users can focus on exploring their data. 

the  burden  of  collecting  data 

There  is  a  caveat  about  user  involvement  in  reflection  that 
is  important.  In  the  Discovery  phase,  user  involvement  is 
critical.  People  want  to  discover  the  relationships  between 
data.  Automation  can  diminish  users’  engagement  with 
their  data.  This  does  not  mean  that  automation  should  not 
be  supported.  It  just  means  that  automation  should  be 
balanced  with  ways  to  keep  users  engaged  with  their  data. 
One  way  to  do  this  is  to  force  users  to  interact  with  their 
data daily, either by sending reports or alerts. On the other 
hand, user involvement in the Maintenance phase is not as  
critical.  Users  are  just  trying  to  maintain  their  behavior. 
Telling  people  that  they  are  doing  well  can  become 
annoying.  Instead,  the  Ubicomp  tool  should  be  there  to 
notify the user if anything unusual happens. 

Support different kinds of collection tools 
Corollary  to  the  previously  discussed  need,  understanding 
behavior  may  require  exploring  the  relationships  between 
multiple  types  of  data.  For  example,  understanding  how 
one’s  environment  affects  physical  activity  may  require 
collection  of  multiple  types  of  data,  such  as  location,  type 
of  activity,  and  weather. However,  most  tools  for  personal 
informatics only support collection of one or a few types of 
data.  One  thing  to  do  is  to  wait  for  an  “ultimate”  data 
collection  tool  that  can  collect  any  kind  of  the  data  that  a 
user  wants  to  collect.  However,  this  might  just  be  a  pipe 
dream  or  could  be  too  far  off  into  the  future.  More 
realistically, users should be allowed to use different kinds 
of collection tools, and then a system or a service can help 
users  integrate  data  from  the  different  collection  tools. 
There is a proliferation of APIs available, and we can take 
advantage  of  this.  Recently,  Fitbit  and  Zeo  partnered  with 
RunKeeper  to  share  data  with  each  other.  This  is  a  good 
development because people can now use different tools to 
collect data. However, this is still incomplete because there 
is  a  plethora  of  tools  that  are  not  interoperable.  Device 

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China412 
interoperability  has  been  part  of  Ubicomp  since  Weiser 
started the field [29], so the expertise exists in Ubicomp to 
help  develop  and  establish  standards  for  interoperation 
between self-tracking devices and systems.  

Data should be presented together 
One of the consequences of needing multiple types of data 
during  the  Discovery  phase  is  that  people  have  to  use 
different  kinds  of  tools.  Unfortunately,  the  current  state  of 
personal informatics systems is that they tend to be silos of 
data,  that  is,  they  do  not  share  data  with  other  systems. 
When  they  do  share  data,  they  do  so  in  a  limited  fashion, 
only  supporting  a  few  tools.  One  of  the  many  complaints 
that  people  had  was  that  they  had  to  go  to  different 
applications/web  sites  to  answer  their  questions.  They 
wished  that  they  could  explore  their  data  in  a  single 
interface.  Again,  Ubicomp  technologies  can  help  here. 
There  has  been  plenty  of  research  in  Ubicomp  on  how  to 
integrate  data  together  [9,12].  The  technology  is  already 
available  to  help  people  collect  and  see  their  data  from 
multiple sources at once. 

Reduce the upfront cost of data collection  
People in the Discovery phase are interested in relationships 
between different kinds of personal data. This presents two 
kinds  of  problems.  First,  users  have  to  spend  a  significant 
amount  of  time  collecting  data.  One  solution  is  to  support 
lifelong  automated  data  collection  of  personal  data,  which 
many Ubicomp research projects are exploring [12,14]. The 
second  problem  is  that  users  cannot  predict  whether  they 
are  collecting  all  of  the  data  they  need.  This  problem  is 
called the relevance paradox [2]. For example, people often 
do not decide to self-track because the data is not important 
to them. However, when the data becomes important (e.g., 
they get sick or they want to develop new habits), they do 
not have the necessary data to start reflecting immediately. 
Thus, they have to invest plenty of upfront cost to bootstrap 
their data collection. With lifelong data collection, once the 
user  needs  the  data,  Ubicomp  tools  can  provide  the 
necessary  data  for  the  user  to  figure  out  what  their  goal 
should be or what factors are influencing their behavior. 

Supporting Transitions between Phases 
Since  people  transition  between  the  two  phases,  personal 
informatics tools should not be designed for just one phase, 
but  should  be  flexible  to  support  both.  This  is  important 
because  it  prevents  a  potential  problem  with  any  personal 
informatics  tool:  people  may  stop  using  the  tool  because 
their information needs are not appropriately supported. 

Identify which phase the user is in  
Personal  informatics  tools  should  identify  what  phase  the 
user  is  in  and  change  its  reflection  features  appropriately. 
Without  this  support,  people  might  find  the  tool  useless 
because  of  too  little  information  during  the  Discovery 
too  much 
phase,  or  people  may  be  burdened  with 
is  an 
information  during 
interesting  Ubicomp  research  challenge  to  automatically 
determine what phase the user is in, based on sensed data. 

the  Maintenance  phase.  It 

Help users transition from Discovery to Maintenance quickly 
The  Discovery  phase 
intensive  and  can  be 
is  data 
burdensome to users. Personal informatics tools should help 
users  who  are  in  the  Discovery  phase  to  identify  program-
level  goals  and  how  different  factors  affect  their  behavior, 
so  users  can  transition  quickly  to  the  Maintenance  phase. 
This  would  be  interesting  future  work  to  explore  how 
Ubicomp technologies help users understand their data.  

Continuous data collection throughout the phases 
The  amount  of  data  that  users  need  decreases  when  users 
transition  from  the  Discovery  phase  to  the  Maintenance 
phase.  However,  this  does  not  mean  that  tools  should 
collect  less  data  during  the  Maintenance  phase.  Instead, 
only  the  amount  of  data  presented  to  the  user  should 
decrease.  We  suggest  tools  should  continue  collecting  as 
much  data  in  the  Maintenance  phase  as  during  the 
Discovery  phase.  This  ensures  that  if  a  user  who  is  in  the 
Maintenance  has  to  transition  to  the  Discovery  phase 
because of a new problem, the user can immediately reflect 
on her data. 

CONCLUSIONS 
This  paper  explores  the  different  questions  that  people  ask 
about  their  data  and  why  they  ask  these  questions.  We 
identified  six  types  of  questions:  Status,  History,  Goals, 
Discrepancies,  Context,  and  Factors.  We  discuss  how 
people  answered  these  questions  using  existing  tools  and 
the  problems  that  they  encountered.  Identifying  these 
questions  is  important  because  they  require  different 
answers  and  different  kinds  of  data,  which  have 
implications  on  how  tools  should  support  them.  Ubicomp 
technologies  play  a  big  role  in  addressing  these  needs 
because  what  data  is  collected  and  how  data  is  collected 
affect how people reflect on their data. 

We also discovered that these questions are not asked at the 
same  time.  We  identified  two  distinct  phases  in  which 
people  ask  certain  questions  more  often  than  others: 
Discovery  and  Maintenance.  The  distinction  between  the 
phases  is  important  because  it  highlights  the  need  for 
personal  informatics  tools  to  support  different  information 
needs,  and  to  be  better  tailored  to  users'  current  needs, 
instead  of  providing  them  all  the  tools  to  answer  all  six 
questions  at  once  (when  they  do  not  need  all  of  them). 
Additionally, the phases are not static; people's information 
needs  change.  They 
to 
transition 
Maintenance,  and  vice  versa.  Again,  Ubicomp  can  play  a 
big role here supporting the different information demands 
of the two phases and the transitions between them. 

from  Discovery 

Though  we  did  not  conduct  a  controlled  study  to  observe 
how  the  questions  differ  between  the  phases  because  it  is 
out  of  the  scope  of  this  research,  the  identification  of  the 
questions  and  the  phases  is  an  important  first  step  towards 
the development of future controlled studies. For example, 
we could create visualizations for each of the questions then 
observe  whether  people  use  certain  visualizations  more 
often  than  others  based  on  what  phase  they  are  in.  We 
expect  that  people  in  the  Discovery  phase  will  heavily  use 

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China413visualizations  that  answer  History,  Goals,  Context,  and 
Factors  questions,  while  people  who  are 
the 
Maintenance  phase  will  use  visualizations  that  answer 
Status and Discrepancy questions. 

in 

As evidenced by articles on personal informatics [3,30] and 
the  growing  Quantified  Self  community  around  the  world 
(http://quantifiedself.com/),  more  and  more  people  are 
using personal informatics tools. However, current personal 
informatics 
tools  are  not  designed  with  a  sufficient 
understanding  of  users’  self-reflection  needs.  This  study 
takes one step towards an understanding of these needs. We 
identified  six  main  questions,  which  people  ask  in  varying 
frequency  between  two  phases.  We  presented  features  that 
should  be  supported  in  personal  informatics  tools  and 
discussed  ways  that  Ubicomp  can  provide  the  necessary 
support. We believe that this work will help developers and 
designers  more  appropriately  build  personal  informatics 
tools and take better advantage of Ubicomp technologies to 
help users self-reflect. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  work  is  based  on  research  supported  by  the  National 
Science  Foundation  under  Grant  No.  IIS-0325351  and 
EEEC-0540865. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Abowd, G.D. & Mynatt, E.D. Charting Past, Present, 
and Future Research in Ubiquitous Computing. 
TOCHI, 2000, pp. 29-58. 

2.  Andrews, D. The IRG Solution - Hierarchical 

Incompetence and How to Overcome It. Souvenir 
Press: London, 1984. 

3.  Brophy-Warren, J. “The New Examined Life.” Wall 

Street Journal, 6 Dec 2008. 

4.  Card, S.K., Mackinlay, J.D., & Shneiderman, B. 

Readings in information visualization: using vision to 
think. Morgan Kaufman: 1999. 

5.  Carver, C. & Scheier, M.F. On the self-regulation of 

behavior. Cambridge University Press, 2001. 

6.  Consolvo, S., McDonald, D.W., & Landay, J. Theory-

Driven Design Strategies for Technologies that Support 
Behavior Change in Everyday Life. CHI’09, pp. 405-
414. 

7.  DiClemente, C.C., Marinilli, A.S., Singh, B., & 

Bellino, E. The Role of Feedback in the Process of 
Health Behavior Change. American Journal of Health 
Behavior, 25(3), 2000, pp. 217-227. 

8.  Endsley, M.R. The Role of Situation Awareness in 

Naturalistic Decision Making. Naturalistic Decision 
Making, 1997, pp. 269-282. 

9.  Freeman, E. & Gelernter, D. Lifestreams: A Storage 

Model for Personal Data. SIGMOD Record, 25(1), 
1996, pp. 80-86. 

10.  Froehlich, J., Dillahunt, T., Klasnja, P., Mankoff, J., 

Consolvo, S., Harrison, B., & Landay, J.A. Ubigreen: 
Investigating a Mobile Tool for Tracking and 
Supporting Green Transportation Habits. CHI’09, pp. 
1043-1052. 

11.  Frost, J. and Smith, B.K. Visualizing Health: imagery 

in diabetes education. DUX’03, pp. 1-14. 

12.  Gemmell, J., Bell, G., and Lueder, R. MyLifeBits: a 

personal database for everything. Communications of 
the ACM, 2006, pp. 88-95. 

13.  He, A.H., Greenberg, S., & Huang, E.M. One Size 

Does Not Fit All: Applying the Transtheoretical Model 
to Energy Feedback Technology Design. CHI’10, pp. 
927-936. 

14.  Hodges, S., Williams, L., Berry, E., et al. SenseCam: A 
Retrospective Memory Aid. Ubicomp'06, pp. 177-193. 
15.  Intille, S.S., Rondoni, J., Kukla, C., Ancona, I., & Bao, 
L. A Context-Aware Experience Sampling Tool. 
CHI'03, pp. 972-973. 

16.  Jones, W., & Teevan, J. Personal Information 

Management. UW Press, 2007. 

17.  Li, I., Dey, A.K., & Forlizzi, J. A Stage-Based Model 

of Personal Informatics Systems. CHI'10, pp. 557-566. 
18.  Lin, J.J., Mamykina, L., Lindtner, S., Delajoux, G., & 
Strub, H.B. Fish’n’Steps: Encouraging Physical 
Activity with an Interactive Computer Game. 
Ubicomp'06, pp. 261-278. 

19.  Matthews, T., Rattenbury, T., & Carter, S. Defining, 
designing, and evaluating peripheral displays: an 
analysis using Activity Theory. Human-Computer 
Interaction Journal, 22(1), 2007. 

20.  Miller, T. & Stasko, J. Artistically Conveying 

Information with the InfoCanvas: A Highly, 
Personalized, Elegant Awareness Display. AVI'02. 
21.  Peesapati, S.T., Schwanda, V., Schultz, J., Lepage, M., 
Jeong, S., & Cosley, D. Pensieve: Supporting Everyday 
Reminiscence. CHI'10, pp. 2027-2036. 

22.  Pousman, Z. & Stasko, J. A Taxonomy of Ambient 

Information Systems: Four Patterns of Design. AVI’06, 
pp. 67-74. 

23.  Powers, W.T. Behavior: The control of perception. 

Chicago: Alidine, 1973. 

24.  Preuveneers, D. & Berbers, Y. Mobile Phones 

Assisting With Health Self-Care: a Diabetes Case 
Study. MobileHCI’08,  pp. 177-186. 

25.  Prochaska, J.O., Velicer, W.F. The Transtheoretical 

Model of health behavior change. American Journal of 
Health Promotion, 12(1), 1997, pp. 38-48. 

26.  Schank, R.C. & Abelson, R.P. Scripts, plans, goals, 

and understanding. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1977. 

27.  Schunk, D. H., & Swartz, C. W. Goals and progress 
feedback: Effects on self-efficacy and writing 
achievement. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 
18(3), 1993, pp. 337-354. 

28.  Seligman, C., & Delay, J.M. Feedback as a Means of 
Decreasing Residential Energy Consumption. Journal 
of Applied Psychology, 62(4), 1977, pp. 363-368. 

29.  Weiser, M. The Computer for the 21st Century. 

SIGMOBILE, 3(3), July 1991, pp. 3-11. 

30.  Wolf, G. “The Data-Driven Life.” The New York 

Times, 28 April 2010. 

Paper Session: How Healthy?UbiComp'11 / Beijing, China414 
  
