Understanding Animals: A Critical Challenge in ACI 

Fredrik Aspling 
Department of Computer and 
Systems Sciences 
Stockholm University, Sweden 
aspling@dsv.su.se 

Oskar Juhlin 
Department of Computer and 
Systems Sciences 
Stockholm University, Sweden 
oskarj@dsv.su.se 

Heli Väätäjä 
Tampere University of 
Technology 
Tampere, Finland 
heli.vaataja@uta.fi 

ABSTRACT 
We  present  a  qualitative  content  analysis  of  visual-verbal 
social  media  posts,  where  ordinary  dog  owners  pretend  to 
be their canine, to identify meaningful facets in their dogs’ 
life-worlds,  e.g.  pleasures  of  human-dog  relation,  dog-dog 
relations, food etc. We use this knowledge to inform design 
of “quantified pets”. The study targets a general problem in 
Animal-Computer  Interaction  (ACI),  i.e.  to  understand 
animals  when  designing  “for”  them,  although  lacking  a 
common  language.  Several  approaches,  e.g.  ethnography 
and participatory design, have been appropriated from HCI 
without 
a 
methodological  creativity  and  pluralism  by  suggesting  an 
additional  approach  drawing  on  “kinesthetic  empathy”.  It 
implies  to  understand  animals  by  empathizing  with  their 
bodily  movements  over  time  and  decoding  the  realities  of 
their  life-worlds.  This,  and  other  related  approaches,  has 
inspired animal researchers to conduct more or less radical 
to 
participant  observations  during  extensive  duration 
understand  the  perspective  of  the  other.  We  suggest  that 
dog owners whom share their lives with their dogs already 
possess  a  similar  understanding  as  these  experts,  and  thus 
uphold  important  experiences  of  canine  life  that  could  be 
used to understand individual dogs and inspire design. 

issue.  We  argue 

exhausting 

the 

for 

Author Keywords 
Animal-Computer Interaction; Quantified Pets; Dog Blogs; 
Social Media; Kinesthetic Empathy; Pet Dogs; 

ACM Classification Keywords  
H5.m.  Information  interfaces  and  presentation  (e.g.,  HCI): 
Miscellaneous.  

INTRODUCTION 
In  recent  years,  we  have  seen an emergent design  interest 
in  smart  computing  and  sensing  technologies  to  monitor 
different  types  of  animals  (e.g.  [24]),  especially  pet  dogs 
[2,  6,  7,  8,  9,  37,  50].  Ideas  for  such  systems  tend  to  be 
generated  from  interviews  with  dog  owners  about  their 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  Copyrights  for 
components  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored. 
Abstracting  with  credit  is  permitted.  To  copy  otherwise,  or  republish,  to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

NordiCHI'18, September 29-October 3, 2018, Oslo, Norway 
 © 2018 Association for Computing Machinery. 
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-6437-9/18/09…$15.00 

https://doi.org/10.1145/3240167.3240226 

experiences and expectations of such technologies [43, 44]. 
These studies revealed that the dog owners were interested 
in  monitoring  physical aspects of  their  dogs, e.g.  physical 
activity, barking, heart rate, stress level, body temperature, 
hunger, growth, location, and what their dogs was doing in 
home alone scenarios. Similar projects focus on monitoring 
dogs’  caloric  input/outputs,  as  well  as  exercise  and 
movement  habits  [41].  Other  topics  concern  identifying 
physical  behaviors  such  as  chewing  barking,  pawing,  and 
sniffing  with  collar-worn  sensors  [25],  or  computer  vision 
[1].  Consumer  oriented  activity  trackers  directed  towards 
companion dogs (e.g. FitBark, PetPace, Whistle) measures 
physical  activity  and  wellbeing  of  pet  dogs  with  sensors 
such  as  GPS,  accelerometer  and  gyroscope.  Other 
commercially oriented sensing technologies even promises 
to  report  on  the  dogs’  emotional  state  by  measuring  and 
interpreting  tail  motion  (e.g.  TailTalk).  In  all,  the  general 
motivation is to increase the dogs’ wellbeing, and advance 
knowledge  for  caretakers  and  veterinarians  about  the 
animals.  

This  emergent  orientation  co-occurs  with  personal 
informatics  and  the  so  called  “quantified  self”-movement 
and  its  determination  to  generate  “self-knowledge  through 
numbers”  [55].  It  engages  the  use  of  sensing  technologies 
for  collecting  and  analyzing  quantitative  and  longitudinal 
data of several aspect of behaviors and performances of the 
human  self.  The  research  interest  in  this  movement,  has 
been  to  understand  these  users  in  terms  of  their  practices, 
motivations,  and  encountered  problems  to  generate  design 
implications  (e.g.  [24;  31;  46]).  Given  this  desire  to 
measure  human  life,  it  is  not  so  strange  that  animals  and 
especially pet dogs whom many of us share our lives with, 
are addressed. Although, currently in a constrained manner, 
limited to a “physical health paradigm” or early ideas, such 
as  measuring  dogs’  emotional  states.  However,  there  is 
probably more to dogs’ wellbeing than physical health, and 
likewise  a  need 
their 
to  explore  new 
measurability. 

topics  and 

In  HCI,  there  is  a  growing  body  of  research  on  Animal-
Computer  Interaction  (ACI)  where  the  specific  concern  of 
widening  the  design  scope  in  “quantified  pets”  has  been 
acknowledged (e.g. [25, 41, 43, 44]) and problematized [28, 
29,  34].  From  a  critical  perspective  it  is  argued  that  such 
technology  can  risk  to  decrease  or  even  replace  owners’ 
ability  to  interpret  their  dogs’  behavior,  and  consequently 
disrupt  human-animal  relationships  and  animal  welfare 

 
 
 
 
[28].  Furthermore,  it is argued  that  commercially  available 
products  lack  foundation  in  animal  behavior  science,  and 
that  their  promises  tend  to  be  impractical  and  unreliable 
(e.g.  measuring  dog  emotion)  [29]. There  is always a  need 
to  be  skeptical  and  critical,  especially  of  risky  and 
improbable 
unintended 
consequences. For quantified pets there is a need to be extra 
cautious, especially if the systems lack validity and primary 
becomes  gadgets 
the  animals’ 
perspectives and well-being becomes secondary.  

for  humans  where 

design 

ideas 

their 

and 

The 
topic  of  designing  quantified  pets  depends  on 
understanding  animals.  This  is  fundamental  for  ACI  that 
even  has  extended  the  ambition  to  design  “for”  animals 
[33], which in this case would translate to understand what 
animals would like to convey to humans. Such a project is 
obviously  difficult  due  to  interspecies  differences  and 
communicative  barriers.  The  interaction  between  humans 
and  canine 
through  nonverbal 
communications,  such  as  posture  and  gaze  (e.g.  [16]). 
Lacking  a  common  language  is  a  challenge  when  figuring 
out what would be a meaningful quantification. Despite the 
epistemological and intrinsic problems of understanding the 
wants and needs of animals, such as pet dogs, there is still a 
need  for  the  field  to  seriously  consider  and  creatively 
explore  the  opportunities  and  challenges  related  to  this 
inquire.  

foremost  pursued 

is 

As a way to address the challenge to unpack user demands, 
and  similar to  research  within  HCI,  some  researchers  have 
turned  to  participatory  design  (e.g.  [18,  53]).  The  method 
suggests  to  overcome  the  challenge  by  involving  the  user 
directly  in  the  design  process  rather  than  relying  on  the 
designer's  knowledge  of  the  user  [18].  However,  the 
reported 
rather 
superficially,  and  they  fail  to  explain  how  animals  act  as 
designers.  We  argue  that  ACI  should  strive  to  creatively 
and cautiously explore additional methods and approaches, 
to  get  closer  to  an  understanding  of  what  animals  might 
want and consider as meaningful, in order to ground design 
closer to their own needs and interests.  

articulate 

demands 

studies 

user 

An  important  point  of  inspiration  can  be  found  in  animal 
studies, where several scholars take into account ‘the point 
of  view’  of  the  animals  they  observe  (e.g.  [19,  39,  49]). 
This  approach  has  developed  over  the  last  three  decades, 
and  has  been  defined  as  a  radical  shift  by  philosopher 
Vinciane  Despret  [10,  11].  It  provides  more  reliable 
descriptions,  and  most  importantly  for  ACI,  they  identify 
behaviors  that  presumably are the  most  meaningful  for  the 
in  Shapiro’s 
animals.  A  similar  approach 
autoethnographic  work  and  his 
idea  of  “kinesthetic 
empathy”  [48],  in  which  a  person  attempts  to  empathize 
with  an  animal  by  understanding  their  bodily  experiences 
over  time  and  their  personal  history,  and  then  tries  to 
understand  the  human-dog  relationship  from  the  dogs 
perspective  (rather  than  the  other  way  around).  Such  an 
approach,  where  understanding  rests  on  long  term  and 
situated  experiences,  could  be  fruitful  to  generate  design 

is  found 

ideas  about  what  matters  for  animals  and  what  they 
possibly could  find important. We  argue  that ordinary  dog 
owners  develop  a  kind  of  kinesthetic  and  biographical 
empathy  as  they  are  intimately  involved  in  long  term 
interaction  with  their  canines.  They  are  naturally  involved 
in  their  dogs’  lives  and  interact  with  them  under  similar 
circumstances as with other family members.  

Besides  discussing  how  such  a  methodology  could  be 
useful  for  ACI,  we have  been interested  in analyzing  such 
an  approach  when  its  adopted  by  ordinary  dog  owners  in 
social  media  where  they  create  profiles  for  their  pets  and 
share  posts  from  their  dogs’  “point  of  view”.  Although 
being  problematic  in  terms  of  e.g.  being  anthropomorphic 
and  humoristic  in  various  grades,  these  posts  offer  a  rich 
empirical material of canine life. They involve detailed and 
continual accounts of different significant aspects related to 
canine life in a broad range of mundane everyday scenarios. 

We  are  especially  interested  in  exploring  to  what  extent 
these posts can help us to ask questions of what matters for 
the animals, and to what extent they can help us to identify 
what  that  possibly  can  be  important  when  it  comes  to 
design  for  them.  Hence,  if  the  data  can  help  us  answer 
questions on what to quantify in canine life that actually is 
meaningful and could benefit the dogs. The analysis reveals 
that the dogs’ perspectives and experiences, when imagined 
by  their  owners,  is  concerned  with  ordinary  things  like 
social  relations  with  other  dogs  as  well  as  humans; 
spatiality  and  the  physical  environment;  physical  objects; 
emotional  attitudes  and  various  set  of  ordinary  activities. 
This  implies  that  design  of  “quantified  pets”  should  focus 
on the mundane and ordinary aspects of everyday dog life. 
Sensor  technologies can  potentially  be  an effective  way  to 
slowly  build  an  increased  empathy  for 
their  canine 
companions, both in terms of a sensibility towards physical 
expressions and experience, as well as building and logging 
a biographical understanding over time.  

RELATED WORK 
In this section, we reflect upon methodological approaches 
in  ACI  for  understanding  animals.  We  also  discuss  the 
method  of  dwelling  into  the  presence  of  other  animals  to 
reveal what they find important and meaningful.  

to  design 

is  a  growing 

Methods to include animals' needs in design 
There 
information 
interest 
technology for animals of various kinds, as expressed in the 
formulation  of  a  research  area  called  Animal-Computer 
Interaction  (ACI).  An  important  design  intent,  is  the 
ambition  to  design  for  and  with  animals  [33,  35,  36].  The 
ambition  is  to  diverge  from  design  that  utilizes technology 
and animals in the sole interest of humans. The ambition is 
aligned  with  a  general  ambition  in  HCI  to  understand  and 
capture  users'  needs  and  develop  them  into  systems 
requirements  [45],  i.e.  to  identify,  describe  and  analyze 
relevant  aspects  of  user  experiences  so  that  design  is 
adequately  informed.  Obviously,  it  is  quite  a  challenge  to 
understand  what  the  animals  want  to  have,  and  how 
computer  systems  could  provide  such  services.  It  is  a 

challenge  since  we  still  struggle  with  the  same  topic  also 
when  it  comes  to  our  own  species.  Although  dogs  do  not 
communicate with us in our language, we still communicate 
with  each  other  with  various  signals,  vocalizations  and 
body  postures,  for  example.  As  the  common  language  is 
learned on both sides, this creates a challenge to overcome 
in design activities (e.g. [15, 53]).  

A  small  number  of  studies  in  ACI  focus  on  the  topic  of 
unpacking  animal  practices  e.g  ethnographic  observations 
of  hunting  [3,  52]  and  video  analysis  of  dog  walking  [2]. 
Taken  together,  these  studies  reveal  interesting  aspects  of, 
life.  At 
in  particular,  canine 
the 
the  same 
methodologies  have 
their  weaknesses.  Ethnographic 
observations  build  on  limited  experiences,  and  video 
analysis  risks  missing  experiential  aspects,  which  are  not 
empirically  available  in  interaction.  Interviews  with  e.g. 
dog  owners  (e.g.  [28,  43,  44])  is  a  commonly  applied 
method,  but it  risk to  provide  more  or less  anthropocentric 
generalizations  with  limited  value  of  design,  or  not  being 
valid descriptions.  

time, 

the 

suggests 

the  user 

learn  about 

Similar  to  research  within  HCI,  several  researchers  have 
turned  to  design,  e.g.  participatory  design,  speculative 
design and research through design, as a way to address the 
challenge  of  unpacking  user  demands  at  the  same  time  as 
designing  “for”  the  user.  Participatory  design  has  been 
adopted  in  a  number  of  projects  (e.g.  [18,  35,  53]).  The 
challenge  by 
to  overcome 
method 
"…involving  the  user  directly  in  the  design  process  rather 
than relying on the designer's knowledge of the user" [18]. 
Such  co-design  builds  on  two  different  sharing  principles 
i.e.  "…shared language between the  designer  and the  user, 
or  on  that  the  designer  can  reasonably  transfer  her  own 
experiences  with  a  designed  object  to  those  of  her  users" 
[18].  The  designer  increases  the  understanding  of  the  user 
by  observing  what  they  do  i.e.  participant  observation. 
the  design 
Equally,  important, 
possibilities,  e.g.  new  technologies,  from  the  designer  and 
can  thereby  themselves  articulate  their  demands  and 
suggest  solutions.  Some  of these  ACI  studies  do  report  on 
designers'  "observations"  [18],  such  as  the  practices  of 
cancer 
interaction. 
Unfortunately,  such  learnings  are  not  in  focus  in  the 
reported studies. More important, they lack articulations of 
how  the  animals  express  their  demands  or  suggested 
solutions.  Again,  it is  demonstrated that the  dogs  take  part 
in joint activities, such as smelling cancer samples [20, 35] 
or  creative  play  [53].  But  there  is  nothing  presented  that 
in  doing  and 
indicates 
the  animals  are  active 
in 
contributing 
participatory design. Hammeleff et al. [18] even note, in the 
most  methodologically  elaborate  study  on  this  topic,  that 
the animals'  engagement  "…  is  not  necessarily  in the  form 
of intentional or functional alteration or modification but in 
the  form  of  playful  exploration  of  the environment."  Thus, 
the  reported  design  work  that  is  presented  as  "participant 
design"  does  not  have  its  focus  on  articulating  user 

to  design  work,  as 

is  conceived 

detection 

playful 

dogs 

that 

and 

it 

demands and at the same time conflate participation in play 
with  participation  in  design,  which  leave  us  with  a 
remaining problem of understanding the user.  

reference 

Another  way  of  handling  the  problem  is  to  avoid  attempts 
to  understand  animals  in  advance  of  engaging  in  design. 
This  approach  is  turned  speculative  design.  Lawson  et  al. 
[28]  use  it  as  a  way  to  speculate  about  possible  systems 
with 
to  existing  commercial  products  of 
quantified  pet  applications.  In  the  study,  they  explore 
attitudes  towards  such  systems by  interviewing  pet owners 
and  animal  experts.  It  revealed  that  pet  owners  were 
uncritically interested in technologies that e.g. could detect 
emotions  of their  dogs,  while animal experts  where  highly 
critical  of  such  technologies.  However,  such  proposed 
system is explicitly intended for dog owners and not for the 
animals.  In  another  paper  [29],  Lawson  et  al.  speculate 
about 
technology  designed  by  dogs  and  how  such 
technology could look like and be used. They ground their 
speculations in dogs cognitive and communicative abilities. 
This  approach  is  envisioned  to  explore  "how  technology 
may  support  the  agency  of  the  animal,  so  that  they  can 
genuinely  be  considered  users"  [Ibid.,  p.  40].  These 
speculations are  intendedly close  to  the animal  as  user but 
they  are  not  grounded 
in  empirical  observations. 
Speculative approaches  have also  been used  as a  means  to 
imagine life as experienced by animals and design systems 
meaningful  for  them  [42].  The  latter  two  papers  (i.e.  [29; 
42])  are also argued as  a  way to  illustrate the  dangers and 
absurdity of trying to co-design with the “voiceless”.  

In  sum,  in  sharing  the  ambition  to  design  for  and  with 
animals,  we  are  constrained  by  existing  ACI  methods  to 
understand animals, or stuck between either speculations or 
overstating  their  participation  in  design.  All  contributions 
are  of  course  legitimate  since  the  challenge  is  hard.  This 
leads us to call for increased methodological creativity. For 
example, we suggest that an alternative approach to acquire 
such  knowledge  can  be  found  by  articulating  human 
experience of sharing life with canines. 

Kinesthetic empathy and the animals’ perspectives 
We have emphasized the need of understanding animals in 
order  to  design  for them.  As  we have  seen  in  the  previous 
section there are different methods and approaches of doing 
so, such as participatory design (e.g. [18, 53]). Another way 
is to imagine life from the dog’s perspective. As proclaimed 
by  Despret  [10,  11],  observations  of  animals  with  such  an 
approach  opens  up  for  different  questions  and  identifies 
behaviors  that  presumably  are  of  meaningful  value  for  the 
animals.  Thus,  to  develop  meaningful  design  for  animals 
we should orient towards the animals’ subjective lifeworlds, 
i.e.  “where  things,  activities,  relations,  and  events  have 
experiential significance” [9, p. 89].  

A  radical  example  is  explored  by  Foster  [14]  where  he 
describes his experiences of trying to live as different wild 
animal  in  their  natural  surroundings.  As  noted  by  Sanders 
[47],  dwelling  into  other  animal’s  perspective  is  also  done 

by  regular  dog  owners  as  they  sometimes  are  found  in 
situations  where  they  must  “speak  for”  their  “mute” 
companion.  As  such,  “they  make  use  of  a  rich  body  of 
knowledge  derived  from  an  intimate  understanding  of  the 
animal-other  built  up 
the  course  of  day-to-day 
experiences” [47, p. 17]. 

in 

is 

Even if scientific advancement has increased the awareness 
of animal consciousness and subjectivity [17], as well their 
emotional lives [4], there is still skepticism regarding what 
we can know what it is like to be another species (e.g. [40, 
51]).  This 
evidently 
epistemological  dilemma 
problematic  for  ACI  and  its  ambition  to  treat  animals  as 
stakeholders of design. When designing for animals without 
human  utilitarian  agendas  we  are  confronted  with  the 
interpret  and 
intriguingly  difficult  quest,  namely 
evaluating their subjective experiences, individual demands 
and likes. Something that to a large extent involves various 
degrees of anthropomorphism. Instead of avoiding or taking 
an  agnostic  approach  of  such  enquires,  we  should  at  least 
aim  towards  an  open-minded  -  and  equally  skeptical  - 
attitude to what they might be experiencing. In doing so we 
should encompass and evaluate all possible resources.  

to 

it 

inside 

the  head, 

Indeed,  it  is  impossible  to  completely  enter  the  mind  of 
another  animal.  However,  symbolic  interactionism  and  as 
well  as  social  phenomenology  argues  that  mind  is  not 
exclusively 
is  also  a  “social 
accomplishment” [16,  p. 123].   Cognitive ethologists,  such 
as  Beakoff,  argues  that  animals’  emotions  are  visible  for 
observers  [4].  From  such  standpoints,  it  is  understood  that 
action  always  is  minded  and  subjectively  meaningful,  and 
that  such  meaning  is  accessible.  This  is  something  that  is 
shared  by  ethnomethodology  (e.g.  [2;  16]),  where  the 
subjective lifeworlds of actors (in terms of e.g. experiences 
and  intentions)    are  not  restricted  to  being  inside  their 
heads,  but  emerges  and  is  exposed  in  regular  interactions, 
by  paying  close  attention  to  the  bodily  details.  Such 
accounts  on  human-animal  interaction  have  previously 
focused on leashed interaction [2, 27] and play [16].  

Shapiro’s  idea  of  “kinesthetic  empathy”  combined  with  a 
biographical  sensibility  [48],  broadens  such  accounts. 
Sharing  a  close  attention  to  bodily  details,  kinesthetic 
empathy  adds  a  biographical  understanding  of  individual 
dogs.  It involves an  understanding  of individual  dogs’ and 
their bodily expressions in specific contexts and over time. 
It  adds  an  important  dimension  to  this  kind  of  enquires  of 
understanding  and  observing  accountable  aspects  of  the 
dogs’ experiential lifeworlds. Building an understanding of 
canines’  bodily  expressions  in  shared  situations  over  time 
increases the  bond and  understanding  for each  other  in  the 
human-canine  relationship.  Ordinary  dog  owners  whom 
closely share their lives and households with their canines, 
potentially, and to various degree, develop such an empathy 
with  their  dogs.  There  are  different  ways  of  embody  the 
animals  experience,  e.g.  to  see  imagine  life  “from  inside” 
with  minimal  or  none 
increase 
interference by “’undo and redo’ their own bodies in order 

interference,  or 

to 

to  interact  more  closely  with  the  observed  animals  and 
respond  to  them  more cautiously”  [11,  p.  51].  Dog owners 
obviously  belongs  to  the  latter,  which  can  upsurge  a 
kinesthetic empathy. 

In  sum,  we  argue  for  a  need  of  grounding ideas  for  design 
reveals 
in  detailed  empirical  observations 
that  e.g. 
lifeworlds.  Such 
the  animals’ 
meaningful  facets  of 
understanding 
long-term 
situated 
in 
experiences.  This  is  not  only  is  possessed  by  observing 
scientists, such as ethologists and ethnographers, but is also 
accessible to regular dog owners.  

emerges 

and 

METHOD AND SETTING 
We propose a new and additional methodological approach 
to the field of ACI, which draws on the theory presented in 
the  previous  section.  Instead  of  engaging  in  demanding 
participant  observation  (e.g.  [16,  14]),  we  analyze  already 
available  ethno-accounts.  We  provide  a  qualitative  content 
analysis  of  social  media  posts  by  dog  profiles  where  dog 
owners  give  voice  to  their  dog  by  interpreting  and 
imagining 
their  dogs’  perspectives.  As  a 
methodological starting point, we considered these posts as 
expressing  some  kind  of  kinesthetic  empathy  and  a 
biographical  understanding  of  the  dogs,  which  could  be 
worth to investigate and evaluate. In this paper, we focus on 
investigating  what  core  facets  of  the  dogs’  lifeworld  that 
can  be  identified  in  such  posts  when  looking  beyond  the 
most obvious layers of anthropomorphism. We are doing so 
to generate ideas for “quantified pets”. In the following we 
describe the method and setting of the study in more detail.  

life  from 

Dog profiles on Instagram and Facebook 
The phenomenon  sometimes  called “social  petworking”  or 
“dog  blogging”,  where  dog  owners  create  a  social  media 
profile  for  their  pet  and  imagine  life  from  their  point  of 
view,  is  a  popular  trend  on  e.g.  Instagram  and  Facebook. 
Typically, by sharing photographs of their dog in mundane 
everyday scenarios with a caption that “gives voice to” and 
imagines  life  from  “the  dogs’  perspective”.  Hence,  this 
phenomenon is different compared to owners posting about 
their pet from their personal social media account, or people 
sharing  animal  memes  for  sole  humoristic  purposes  (e.g. 
[12]).  

There are no exact figures on the amount of dog profiles in 
social  media.  In  a  survey  by  Mars  PetCare  US  [32]  from 
2017, two thousand pet owners and social media users were 
asked  about  how  their  pets  are  involved  in  social  media. 
This  can  give  an  indication  of  the  proportion  of  the 
phenomena.  Around 65 percent of them  posted about  their 
pets twice a week. One out of six (21 per cent) had a profile 
for their pet, and half of these stated that their pets get more 
response  from  the  public  than  their  personal  profiles.  One 
third  (33  per  cent)  reported  that  post  about  their  pets  as 
much as they do about their human family, and 13 percent 
admitted to posting about their pets even more than they do 
about their  human  family.  Different  hashtags  on  Instagram 
can also give an indication of the phenomenon’s proportion, 
e.g.  #dogblog  and  #dogsofinstagram  had  about  200  000 

respectively  over  100  million  posts  by  the  end  of  June 
2018. However, not all the tagged posts are by dog profiles, 
neither are all dog profiles filed under the same tag.  

to 

into 

the  dwell 

the  ambition 

Despite 
the  dogs’ 
perspectives, dog blogging is obviously biased by a human 
perspective.  It  is  doubtful  to  what  extent  they  reveal  the 
truth  about  the  dogs,  and  if  the  interpretation  of  the  dogs’ 
perspectives  is  valid.  It  is  also  unclear  if  the  dog  owners 
themselves  consider  their  interpretations  as  valid  and  their 
degree of seriousness in the activity. This human bias tends 
to  be  exaggerated,  many  times  as  a  form  of  humor  that 
could  be  defined  as  “joyful  anthropomorphism”,  which 
simultaneously  expresses  a  large  proportion  of  love, 
affection and care for the dogs.  

Posts  by  dog  profiles  are  apparently  staged,  but  they  do 
provide  naturalistic  data  of  people  pretending  to  be  their 
pets, which is rare to find elsewhere. This practice is indeed 
a  very  human  practice,  not  only  in  terms  of  being 
anthropomorphic. It has also been argued that dog blogging 
is anthropocentric, and is more about the humans than about 
the  dogs  [30].  Besides  reporting  on  their  dogs’  lives, 
activities,  experiences  and  emotions,  it  can  “convey  the 
humans'  emotional  attachment  to  dogs,  and  to  provide 
information  and  entertainment  to  likeminded  dog  lovers” 
[Ibid.,  p.  64].  Dog  blogs  offers  an  additional  space  for 
socializing  with  other  humans,  which  can  have  a  similar 
effect as  the  social  benefits  of  pet  keeping  in  general  (e.g. 
[54]).  Despite  this  anthropocentric  dimension  of  dog 
blogging,  it  lets  the  owners  imagine  and  reflect  upon 
themselves and their interactions with their dogs from “their 
dogs’  perspectives”.  This  kind  of  imaginative  and  role-
taking  exercise  can  disclose and  lead to  contemplations  on 
what  kind  of  dog  owners  they  are  and  would  like  to  be? 
Their engagement as caretakers? What they are doing with 
their  dogs?  What  their  dogs  like  and  dislike?  It  is  a 
reflective  practice  that  can  influence  their  behavior  and 
identity  as  dog  owners,  as  well  as  their  kinesthetic  and 
biographical empathy towards their dogs. 

Dog  blogging  is  an  emerging  and  interesting  phenomenon 
in  many  ways  which  needs  further  investigations.  In  this 
study,  we  have  been  interested  in  what  kind  of  aspects  in 
the  dogs’  life  that  the  visual-verbal  content  of  these  posts 
expose.  When  dog  owners,  whom  intimately  are  sharing 
their  lives  with  their  dogs  intend  to  dwell  into  their 
presence,  what  aspects  of  the  dogs’  lifeworlds  do  they, 
consciously or unconsciously, choose to reveal?  

A qualitative content analysis of posts by dog profiles 
Qualitative  content  analysis  is  a  research  method  to 
systematically  analyze  and  identify  patterns  and  structures 
in  different  types  of  content  [23].  In  HCI, this  method  has 
foremost  been  used  to  categorize  and  analyze  user-
generated  content  (e.g.  [22]),  but  also  to  apply  more 
interpretative  and  humanistic  approaches  influenced  by 
critical  theory  (e.g.  [5]).  Our  approach  makes  no  effort  to 
go  beyond  the  content  to  analyze  the  discursive  means  of 

how  dogs are  represented  in  these  posts  (e.g.  [30]).  In this 
paper, we have bracketed such ambitions and restricted our 
investigation  to  explore  what  core  facets  in  the  dogs 
lifeworlds  that  can  be  identified  in  these  posts  when  the 
most  obvious  layer  of  anthropomorphism  is  unwrapped. 
This  focus  is  chosen  in  alignment  with  the  ambition  to 
generate ideas and topics for “quantified pets” grounded in 
what  may  be  interesting  and  meaningful  in  the  dogs 
lifeworlds as imagined by their human caretaker. 

Sampling and data 
The  data  consists  of  60  systematically  sampled  visual-
verbal posts by 20 public dog profiles on social media, i.e. 
Instagram  and  Facebook,  with  a  symmetrical  distribution 
embracing  10  profiles  from  each  application.  We  have 
collected  the  last  three  posts  from  each  sampled  profile 
the  25th  (Instagram)  and  26th 
available  on  August 
(Facebook), 2017. All profiles have been judged according 
to  the  sampling  criteria  of  being  authored  by  dog  owners 
pretending  to  be  their  dogs.  Posts  on  such  profiles  present 
the  same  dog  in  a  multitude  of  settings  and  situations  and 
use  the  dogs’  name  or  nickname.  There  are  commonly 
details  about  the  dog  (e.g.  breed,  birthdate,  city,  caretaker) 
in  the  profile  information.  Furthermore,  our  sampling 
criteria  is  restricted  to  posts  where the  users  share a  single 
image.  Posts  with  videos,  multiple  images,  only  text,  and 
other  types  of  posts  have  been  excluded.  The  data  set 
includes posts in terms of image, caption and comments by 
other human and dog profiles. 

The posts on both forums have been systematically sampled 
through  a  “controlled  snowball  sampling”.  The  same 
sampling  strategy  was  applied  for  both  applications.  First, 
we  identified  relevant  hashtags  (e.g.  #dogblog,  #dogblogs, 
#dogblogging and #dogsofinstagram) that we assumed that 
posts by dog profiles could be ascribed with. It seemed that 
a  large  variety  of hashtags  was  used  for  this  phenomenon. 
Two weeks later, on the dates mentioned above, we started 
the  data  collection  by  revisiting  each  forum  and  searched 
for  the  hashtag  #dogblog.  We  used  the  first  dog  profile  in 
the  search  result  that  fulfilled  our  sampling  criteria  as  the 
point  of  departure  for our  data  collection,  and  sampled  the 
latest  three  posts  from  that  profile.  The  next  profile  was 
selected by visiting the newest of these posts and looked for 
the very first dog profile in the commentary thread. We did 
this process three times before actually sampling posts from 
the  next  profile  to  generate  a  more  scattered  data  set.  We 
continued  this  process  until  30  posts  for  each  application 
was  reached.  It  could  have  been  possible  to  collect  a 
randomized sample of posts under a specific hashtag, but it 
would  restrict  the  data  to  a  specific  single  hashtag.  With 
this  technique  we  could  capture  posts  filed  under  several 
relevant hashtags. 

Coding and analyze 
The  data  was  coded  inductively  in  order  to  identify  what 
facets  in  the  dogs’  lifeworld  these  posts  depicts  by 
analyzing the content explicatory and semantically, without 
any  intention  to  reveal  underlying  or  discursive  meanings. 

Temporal 

Relational 

Bodily 

Situational 

FACETS IN DOG LIFE 

- Body movement 
- Body posture 
- Facial expressions 

- Activities 
- Events 

Inner 
- Emotion/mood  
- Attitudes 

DATA 

Verbal 

Physical  
- Physical surroundings  
- Weather conditions 
- Physical artifacts  
- Food and treats 

- Past 
- Present 
- Future 

Visual 

- Physical surroundings  
- Weather conditions 
- Physical artifacts  

- N/A 

- Dogs relation to    
  humans 
- Dogs relation to other   
  dogs 
- Dogs relation to other  
  animals 
- Single Dog 
- Dog-dog/s 
- Dog/s-human/s 
- Dog-other animals 

- N/A 

- N/A 

- Body movement 
- Body posture 
- Gaze 
- Facial expressions 

Superficial 

- Breed 
- Appearance 
- Aesthetics 
- Fashion 

- Breed 
- Appearance 
- Fashion 

Table 1: Overview of facets in dogs’ lifeworlds identified in posts by dog profiles on Instagram and Facebook. 

The visual images and the verbal interpretations were coded 
independently,  and  thereafter  categorized  in  accordance  to 
find  a  comparable  categorical  language  for  both  types  of 
data.  The  coding  and  categorizing  process  was  done 
iteratively through intense collaborative sessions, as well as 
individually  by  one  of  the  researchers  whom  was  main 
responsible for the analysis. The discussions and analytical 
work  from  the  joint  sessions  laid  the  foundation  for  the 
coding scheme. It was applied and constantly improved by 
the responsible coder, whom revisited and coded the rest of 
the  material  in  between  the  collaborative  sessions.  A 
randomized  sample  of  10  %  of  the  coded  material  was 
examined 
three 
collaborating  researchers  using  Fleiss’  kappa,  κ  =  0.831, 
which  denotes  an  almost  perfect  agreement  [26,  p.  165]. 
The  same  sample  was  also  examined  for  individual 
measures  of  intercoder  reliability  between  each  of  the 
researchers, using Cohens’ kappa, κ = 0.771, κ = 0.813, and 
κ  =  0.949,  which  indicates substantial to almost  perfect 
agreements [Ibid]. 

reliability  with 

intercoder 

the 

for 

Ethical considerations 
Even  if  all  posts  in  the  data  are  publicly  available  and 
associated  with  their  dog,  they can  still reveal  glimpses  of 
the owners, and apparently also their dogs, private spheres. 
Given  the  nature  of  information  in  the  posts,  they  are  not 
likely  to  be  considered  as  sensitive  or  directly  harmful, 
neither  for  the  humans  or  canines.  Rather,  they  could 
benefit  from  it  given  the  aim  of  this  paper  and  ACI  as  a 
field.  The  humans  behind  the  profiles  are  to  some  extent 
already  anonymised  as  they  are  registered  in  their  dog’s 
name.  Still,  we  have  excluded  profile  names,  images,  and 
other personal information to strengthen anonymity.  

When doing empirical studies in social media settings there 
is  a  trade-off  between  keeping  data  naturalistic  without 
interference,  and  to  reveal  oneself  as  a  researcher  and 
ensure transparency and  participation  [13,  p.  25].  We  have 
not informed the participant about their participation as we 
have  strived  towards  naturalistic  data.  Moreover,  such 
interaction  risk  to  influence  their  future  social  media 
practices  and  behaviors,  e.g.  in  terms  of  being  more 
restrictive and suspicious. 

RESULTS AND FINDINGS 
From  the  content  analysis  of  social  media  posts  by  dog 
owners  pretending  to  be  their  dogs’  we  identified  seven 

facets  relevant  to  the  lifeworld’s  of  the  dogs  (overview  in 
table 1). In the following, these are presented in detail. 

Physical facets 
This  category  refers  to  the  environment  and  the  physical 
manifestation  of  the  dogs’ 
the 
physical  surroundings  in  which  the  dogs  in  the  posts  are 
situated,  weather  conditions,  food  and  treats,  as  well  as 
physical  artifacts  that  appears  to  have  a  substantial  role  in 
the posts. 

life-worlds,  including 

Physical surroundings 
Information on the physical surroundings was existent in all 
posts. The images  provided  a  basic  understanding,  such  as 
if  they  were  located  outdoors,  and  additionally  if  the 
outdoor  surrounding  was  urban  (e.g.  street,  park,  outside 
shopping  window)  or  wild  (e.g.  up in the  mountains,  lake, 
open  field,  beach).  Images  could  also  reveal  if  the  setting 
was  indoors  and  in  what  type  of  room  (e.g.  kitchen,  hall, 
living  room, bath  room)  the  depicted  situation  takes place. 
The captions, and also the  comments, could  disclose  more 
detailed information on the place or location, e.g. name of a 
city,  or  street,  part  of  city,  park,  or  nature  reserve,  and  if 
they  were  at  home,  in a  hotel  lobby  or at a  friend’s  place, 
which wasn’t visually available in the images. It could also 
provide with information on the dogs’ attitudes and feelings 
towards  the  physical  surroundings.  For  example,  in  an 
image  of  a  dog  running  unleashed  in  an  open  foggy  field 
with the caption: “Sunrise fly in's are the best. Roaming the 
beautiful nature adjacent to the lovely restaurant x in place 
y, an incredible  (dog) friendly place  to  stay and  eat…”.  It 
could  also,  as 
involve 
example  above, 
recommendations to other dogs (and their owners).  

this 

in 

Weather conditions 
Both  the  verbal  and  visual  data  provided  with  information 
on  the  weather  (e.g.  sunny,  warmth,  windy,  cloud,  rainy, 
snowy).  The  verbal  data  offered  additional  details,  e.g. 
temperature, and  could  provide  with information about  the 
weather  even  when  it  was  visually  unavailable  (e.g.  in  the 
posts  of  a  dog  inside  a  café  with  the  caption  “waiting  out 
the rain”).  

It  could  also  include  interpretations  on  the  dogs’  attitudes 
towards the weather. Which, for example, can be illustrated 
by  an  image  of  a  dog  standing  on  the  hind  legs  with  the 
front paws on the owner’s knee with the caption “Enjoying 

 
 
 
 
 
 
the lovely 70F weather!”, or a dog lying in the shade on the 
grass together with a dog friend with the caption “Trying to 
beat  the  summer  heat!”.  It  could  also  access  with 
information on the dogs imagined attitudes towards e.g. wet 
paws. As in the post with an image of a dog during an early 
morning  walk  with  the  caption:  “When  you  have  to  get  to 
the park sooo early in the morning before other dogs show 
up  that  the  sprinklers  are  still  going  and  the  pavement  is 
still wet. RUDE!”. 

Physical artifacts  
Several  artifacts  were  present  in  the  images  and  discussed 
in the text, e.g. leashes, collars, toys, dog beds, clothing and 
accessories. Collars and leashes were present in many of the 
images, but these artifacts were seldom interpreted or dealt 
with  in  the  verbal  data.  However,  being  “off  leash”  and 
“roaming  free”  was positively  interpreted  as  an expression 
for  freedom  and  joy.  Different  kinds  of  toys  (e.g.  frisbee, 
ball, cuddle toy) and dog beds were visually available in the 
images  and  considered  in  the  text.  For  example,  related  to 
ownership and relations to specific toys, as in the image of 
a dog lying down with a cuddle toy between the front paws 
with  the  caption:  “You  better  not  take  my  favorite  toy”. 
Clothing and accessories, e.g. bow ties, where observable in 
a some of the images. These where foremost commented by 
other  dog  and  human  profiles,  e.g.  “nice  bow  tie”,  rather 
than by other dog profiles. Clothing also related to fashion, 
where  different  brands,  fitting  of  dogs clothing  or  “matchy 
outfits”, referring to either human-dog or dog-dog clothing, 
were common topics.  

Food and treats 
The visual data rarely depicted any food or treats, but it was 
frequently  discussed  in the commentary  threads,  especially 
in  discussions  between  dog  profiles.  It  included  taste 
preferences (e.g. “… Can I just have regular yellow cheese 
please?  Partial  to  basic  cheddar  or  perhaps  Edam,  if  I’m 
feeling  exotic”)  as  well  as  different  types  of  controversies 
with  their owner around  food  (e.g. “I  mean,  you  should be 
getting  extra  treats  every  day!  C’mon  humans  get  it 
together!”). 

Temporal facets 
Temporality  (i.e.  past,  present  and  future)  was  only 
depicted  in  the  written  text.  It  could  be  retrospective 
reflections  referring  to  memorable  moments  they  had 
during  the  day  or  from  their  young  puppy  days  and  e.g. 
cover different types of achievements, or the first time they 
encountered  snow.  Usually  with 
the  hashtag  #tbt 
(throwback  Thursday).  It  could  also  be  contemplations 
about  the  future,  such  as  planning  or  longing  for  events 
(e.g. breakfast,  the  weekend, taking  a  walk,  or for the  rain 
to stop), or humoristic reflections about future careers. This 
category  does  perhaps  most  clearly  illustrate  a  reflexivity 
and  a  potentially  increased  biographical  understanding  of 
the human users behind the dog profile.  

Relational facets  
This  category  refers  to  the  dogs’  social  life.  In  the  images 
this  was  analyzed  by  the  visible  social  formations  (e.g. 

single  dog,  dog-human,  dog-dog).  From  the  text,  we  could 
analyze  the  details  of  the  relations  (e.g.  if  the  human  was 
the owner, if the other dog was a sibling or a friend) and the 
dogs’ thoughts and attitudes towards the others. 

Relations to humans 
Humans was seldom present in the images, but much talked 
about in the text. In a few posts the dog was depicted with 
their  owner,  sitting  next  to  each  other  or  where  the  dog  is 
being held or sitting in the leap of a human. In a few other 
posts  the  feet  and  legs  of  humans  was  visible  in  the 
periphery. The dog was clearly the centre of the images and 
this  included  reflections  about  their  human  fellows.  Even 
when  images  depicted  single  dogs  it  was  commonly 
discussed  in  the  text.  For  example,  a  close-up  of  a  dog 
standing on the shore with his tongue out, with the caption: 
“I  just  had  SUCH  a  good  day  with  my  Grandad  Cheese 
(he’s  called  this  cos  he  always  feeds  me  ‘too  much 
cheese’…)”.  

including  conflicts  of 

Captions  and  comments  provided a  rich  material  to  inform 
about  the  details  of  the  relations,  such  as  what  type  of 
relations  they  have,  their  feelings  and  thoughts  about  the 
humans in their social life, what they are doing together. It 
could  reveal  both  positive  and  negative  aspects  of  the 
relations, 
interests  and  power 
relations, or controversies around different subjects, such as 
being “too restricted with food”. In some occasions it could 
also  reveal  loneliness,  e.g.  that  their  “dogmum”  left  them 
home  alone,  or  jealousy  as  in  an  image  depicting  another 
dog  with  the  caption  “why  is  dad  hanging  out  with  this 
dood?!”.  Labeling  the  caretakers  as  mum  and  dad  was 
common  in  the  posts.  It  was  evident  that  the  owners 
consider  their  dogs  as  family  members  where  they  see 
themselves as the parents, and the dogs as their kids.  

Dogs  relation  to  other  humans  was  also  present  in  the 
comments  by other  human  profiles. These comments  were 
filled with positive emotions filled with love, affection and 
aesthetic  admiration.  The  people  in  their  public,  despite  if 
they have offline relations or not, evidently adore and show 
love towards the dogs. 

Relations to other dogs 
Most  of  the  images  depicted  single  dogs,  but  it  was  also 
common that other dogs were present. It could for example 
be  images  of  dogs  lying  or  sitting  next  to  each  other,  or 
images  capturing  the  dogs  while  playing  or  running 
together.  Even  when  the  dogs  were  depicted  alone,  other 
dogs  were  mentioned  and  discussed  in  the  text.  The  posts 
revealed a lot of information about other dogs and the dogs’ 
relation  to  them  in  terms  of  e.g.  if  they  are  siblings  or 
friends and  their  shared  experiences.  As in  the  post of  two 
dogs  lying  on  the  ground  looking  up  towards  humans 
whose legs  only are  visible in  the  image,  with the caption: 
“My  favorite  birthday  photo  with  my  brother.  We  are 
waiting patiently for a birthday steak”. 

There  were  also  discussions  between  dog  profiles  in  the 
commentary  thread.  In  these  discussions  they  for  example 

thread, 

made  plans  and  arranged  future  meetings  of  walking 
together.  It  could  also  be  different  types  of  invitations,  or 
comments supporting the utterances in the original caption. 
The  interpretations  were  commonly  exaggerated  along 
discussion 
than  providing  alternative 
interpretations.  They  also  discussed  different  aspects  of 
their owners, for example related to food/feeding and treats 
as  in  the  comment:  “No  banana?!  Outrageous.  If  this 
cruelty persists come over to our place… we have bananas 
as well as peanut butter treats, carrots and apples and we’ll 
share them with you ;)”.  

rather 

Relations to other animals 
The  dogs’  relations  to  other  nonhuman  animals  was  also 
identified in the material, however only to a limited extent. 
It included other companion species such as cats, and wild 
animals  such  as  geese.  The  former  was  exemplified  by  a 
dog  standing  in  front of  a dog  bed  occupied  by a  cat  with 
the  caption:  “Um,  excuse  me?  Isn’t  that  my  bed?”.  The 
latter was exemplified by a dog was standing in a mountain 
lake close to  flock  of  wild geese,  with  the  caption:  “When 
you’re  chasing  geese  but  your  humans  tell  you  to  “leave 
it”. Okay. I guess I’ll just stand here then”. This engaged a 
discussion  about  the  dogs’  instinct  to  chase  other  animals, 
in  this  case  geese, and the  owner’s  commands and control 
of such instincts. In a sense, these conversations were more 
about relations and controversies between the caretaker and 
the dog rather than dog-other animal relations. 

Situational facets 
This  category  refers  to  the  many  situations,  in  terms  of 
activities  and  events  that  the  dogs  were  faced  with  in  the 
posts.  Typically,  this  was  connected  to  the  ordinary  and 
mundane  aspects  of  everyday  life  of  canines,  e.g.  walking 
with  their  caretakers,  playing  with  other  dogs  or  humans, 
peeing  and  marking,  grooming,  sleeping  or  resting,  eating 
or  waiting  for  food,  beach  trips,  bathing,  hiking,  being 
unleashed  in  the  backyard,  sports  (e.g.  dock  diving)  and 
specific events (e.g. birthdays).  

In  a  few  posts, 
the  situations  were  unnatural  and 
exaggeratedly  staged  by  the  humans,  such  as  in  posts  of  a 
dog in a bath tub with the caption: “I like to unwind with a 
long hot bath and a glass of pinot grigio”, or an image of a 
dog  lying  on  the  back  in  an  armchair  with  a  book  on  his 
chest  and a  half  empty  glass of  wine  on  the table  with  the 
caption:  “Because  ma  took  too  long  to  get  ready”.  These 
posts 
of 
anthropomorphism  with  clear  humoristic  undertones. 
However,  the  majority  of  the  posts  in  the  material  was 
about  ordinary  everyday  situations,  depicting  mundane 
activities  and  human-canine  interactions  without  such  an 
exaggegerated perfomance. 

examples 

extreme 

form 

are 

an 

of 

Bodily facets 
A  number  of  physical  actions  was  identified  in  both  the 
images  and  the  verbal  interpretations.  These  have  been 
categorized  as  bodily  movements,  postures  and  gaze. 
Examples  of  the  former  includes  e.g.  walking,  running, 
standing  still,  and  for  latter  e.g.  sitting,  lying,  carried  by 

human. In the images these where usually easy to identify, 
and  in  the  captions,  these  could  be  exaggerated  as  when  a 
jumping  dog  is  referred  to  as  flying  or  when  a  posture  is 
interpreted  as  posing.  Exaggerations  tended  to  increase  in 
the commentary thread and confirm the original caption and 
could  end  up  in  a  dog  having  their  own  airline  or  being  a 
pilot. In the images, we could also analyze the direction of 
the dogs' gaze and what they possible were looking at. The 
dogs  gaze  was  rarely  interpreted  in the  text  only  in a  very 
few cases, but foremost the interpretations considered other 
aspects.  

Inner facets 
This  category  refers  to  the  inner  lives  of  dogs  in  terms  of 
their  thoughts, emotions  and  attitudes.    It  was  prevalent  in 
most of the posts and is a central feature of dog blogging.  

in 

identified 

Emotion and attitudes 
The dogs’ emotions and moods to are expressed in a highly 
anthropomorphized  manner.  Several  types  of  emotions 
the  material,  both  positive  (e.g.  
were 
happiness, joy, love, freedom), and negative (e.g. boredom, 
loneliness,  longing,  grumpiness,  anger,  jealousy).  The 
former  can  be  exemplified  by  the  following  caption  to  a 
close-up of a dog with his tongue hanging out: “Happy face 
–  when  Mumma  brings  home  some  goodies” and the  latter 
by  a  dog  with  a  similar  facial  expression  standing  in  a 
bathtub filled with water covering her paws and the caption: 
“I had to take a bath. I may be smiling, but it wasn’t fun”. 
The  interpretation  of  the  mood  and  emotions  of  the  dogs 
was  either  connected  to  the  facial  expressions  of  the  dogs 
(as in the first example above, i.e. “happy face”) or related 
to  specific  activities  or  events  (e.g.  a  feeling  of  sadness 
when  being  ill  and  on  medication  or  the  joy  of  taking  a 
morning  walk  or  hiking  up  in  the  mountains).  The  latter 
could  also  have  been  something 
that  owners  have 
interpreted from previous bathing situations throughout the 
years.  As  such  they  possess  some  kind  of  kinesthetic  and 
biographical  knowledge  about  their  dogs  and  what  they 
have over time learned (or at least think they have learned) 
about  what  their  dogs  like  and  don’t  like  to  do.  Attitudes 
towards  different  things  in  the  dogs  lifeworlds  e.g.  the 
physical  surroundings,  weather,  artifacts,  food,  relations, 
was  a  common  topic  in  the  posts.  It  permeates  all  of  the 
identified categories  which  can  be  seen  in  several  excerpts 
in many of the other categories.  

the  dogs 

Superficial facets 
This category refers to the characteristics and appearance of 
the dogs. It was most commonly expressed in comments on 
the  perceived  aesthetics  of 
(e.g.  “cute”, 
“adorable”, “sweet”), mostly by other human profiles, but 
in  a  few  cases  also  by  other  dog  profiles.  It  could  also  be 
other  fundamental  features,  such  as  breed  and  typical 
attributes  (e.g.  style  of  eyebrows,  moustache,  or  corgi 
that  was 
poses).  Clothing,  accessories  and 
mentioned  under  the  category  physical  artifacts  is  also 
related  to  the  superficial  facets.  It  was  also  common  with 
comments  on the  photographical quality  of the images and 

fashion 

other aspects and technicalities related to photography. This 
the  human 
category 
perceptions of the dogs. It is uncertain to what extent this is 
positively meaningful for the dogs. 

foremost  about 

is  apparently 

DISCUSSION 
The  study  intends  to  increase  the  understanding  of  canine 
life  in  the  area  of  Animal-Computer  Interaction  (ACI)  in 
general, and extend its methodological toolbox. We suggest 
to  draw  on  dog-owners  empathic  accounts  of  the  lives  of 
their companion dogs in social media where they pretend to 
be  them  and  imagines  life  from  their  perspectives.  This 
approach  of  observing  people  that  pretend  to  be  their  pets 
and imagines life from their perspective is not restricted to a 
content analysis. It can be applied to various data collection 
methods,  as  well  as  on  other  settings  than  dog  blogs.  It 
complements  available  design  methods,  e.g.  interviews, 
observations, speculative and participatory design, with the 
idea  of  “kinesthetic  empathy”  [48].  This  methodological 
the  dogs’ 
approach  which  builds  on  dwelling 
perspectives  by  people  living close  with their  pets have  its 
obvious  limitations  but  opens  up  a  different  kind  of 
knowledge, compared with e.g. interviews with dog owners 
about  their  dogs,  or  ethnographic  observations  of  animals 
and human-animal interaction in situ.  

into 

In  specific,  we  add  to  previous  research  on  “quantified 
pets”, by investigating which topics that could be of interest 
in designing such systems and how it could be measured. In 
the  following  we  discuss  our  assumption  of  dog  posts  as 
expressions  of  kinesthetic  empathy  as  well  as  the  design 
implications of the is approach. 

Kinesthetic empathy in dog blogging 
There are several indications that blog posts are expressions 
of  “kinesthetic  empathy”  [48].  As  discussed,  the  concept 
refers  to  a  bodily  sensibility  of  mutually  accessible 
experiencing  between  the  interactants.  As  such  it  shares 
to 
similarities  with  an  ethnomethodological  approach 
studying  the  details  of  manifest  human-animal  interaction 
in  concrete  and  ordinary  situations  (e.g.  [2;  16;  27]). 
Kinesthetic  empathy  includes  a  biographical  and  historical 
understanding  of  the  individual  animal.  This  is  central  for 
the  dog  owners  who  shares  the  lives  with  their  pets  and 
have  deeper  knowledge  and  experience  of  their  biography 
than for example animal experts. In that biographical sense, 
it is the dog owners that are the experts of their dogs.  

The  biographical  aspect  of  kinesthetic  empathy  is  evident 
when  it  comes  to  the  caretakers’  ambitions  to  understand 
and  interpret  the  life  worlds  of  their  animals.  In  a  sense, 
they  are  also  writing  their  dogs  biography  when  they  are 
occupied  with  the  reflexive  and  social  practice  of  dog 
blogging.  In  the  analysis,  we  identified  temporality  (i.e. 
temporal facets) as important, it could for example be posts 
where  they are  looking  back  to  their  years as a  puppy and 
what  they  have  accomplished  so  far.  The  biographical 
understanding  also involves  different types  of  facets  in  the 
dogs’ lives,  such  as  their  social lives,  what they are doing, 
and what they seem to like to do. 

To  what  extent  does  the  dog  blogs  express  empathy  with 
their dogs in terms of kinesthetic awareness of their bodily 
experience?  The  captions  seem  to  a  large  extent  be 
grounded,  or  at  least  they  refer  to,  bodily  aspects  such  as 
postures,  movement,  and  facial  expressions  of  the  dogs. 
They are also understood in a context to, e.g. what they are 
doing  (i.e.  situational  and  activity  facets),  where  they  are 
(i.e.  physical  facets),  whom  they  are  with  (i.e.  relational 
facets).  This  is  something  that  can’t  be  revealed  without 
that  sort  of  biographical  and  contextual  information.  The 
dogs experience  (i.e. inner facets) of  all  these facets in  the 
dogs’  life  worlds,  e.g.  what  they  are  thinking  and  feeling 
towards  the  specific  places,  things,  dogs,  their  caretaker  or 
other  people  etc.  either  seem  to  be  interpreted  based  on 
bodily  movement,  postures  and  expressions  with  a 
historical  awareness  of  previous  experiences.  The  dog 
owners’  understanding  and  empathy  for  their  dogs  is  very 
much  a  combination  of  a  bodily  and  biographical 
awareness. However, their interpretations are not to be seen 
as valid explanations of their dogs’ subjective lifeworlds. 

This  kind  of  practice  can  also  be  understood  as  a  practice 
which  would  increase  an  empathy  with  their  dogs  as  they 
their  dogs’ 
reflecting  and  adds 
are  constantly 
biographies. It is also in that sense that dog blogging can be 
connected  to  quantified  pets  as  it  increases  the  knowledge 
of their own dogs and likewise about the owners themselves 
in their role of caretakers. 

to 

Limitations in seeing dog blogs as kinesthetic empathy  
Our approach is grounded in an understanding of dog blogs 
as  expressions  of  kinesthetic  empathy.  However,  such  an 
approach  has  a  number  of  limitations  that  needs  to  be 
recognized.  

All attempts at getting “inside the mind” of another species 
or observing and describing their behavior, constantly leads 
us,  in  various  degrees,  to  subjective  anthropomorphizing 
where the animals are portrayed with human-like qualities, 
or  with  concepts  used 
to  describe  human  behavior. 
Companion  dogs,  who  live  close  upon  us  and  that 
sometimes  are  considered  as  part  of  our  families,  are 
especially subjected to anthropomorphism. 

The  empirical  data  speaks  of  other  concerns  than  canine 
empathy.  This  is  most  visible in the  numerous  jokes  made 
on behalf of the animal. The blog posts are to a large extent 
permeated  with  joyful  and  humoristic  anthropomorphism, 
noticeably  in  combination  with  a  large  dose  of  love  and 
affection  for  the  dogs  -  both  by  the  owners  pretending  to 
their  dogs  and  in  comments  and  likes  from  other  dog  and 
human  profiles.  However,  an  attraction towards humoristic 
effects  can  lead  to  a  bias  in  what  facets  to  reveal  in  their 
dogs’  lives,  that  fits  the  humoristic  line.  The  topics  and 
situations  highlighted  in  the  posts  are  selected  and  staged 
by  the  human  caretakers  and  does  not  reveal all aspects  in 
their dogs’ lives.  

Despite  the  caretakers’  ambition  of  expressing  their  dogs’ 
large  extent 
experiences,  dog  blogging 

to  a 

is 

anthropocentric  [30].  Obviously,  an  orientation  to  other 
concerns than the dog, make the material more problematic 
as  an  expression  of  canine  user  demands.  It  can  either  be 
either  misleading  and  lead  to  design  ideas  that  does  not 
support  quantification  of  positive  dog  experiences.  In  the 
worst case, it can lead to design that is bad for the animal, 
in  the  sense  that  Lawson  et.  al.  [28,  29]  has  discussed. 
Although we surely need to better understand dogs in order 
to design for them, we suggest to see “kinesthetic empathy” 
as a complementary approach to existing methods. 

Design inspiration for quantified dog applications 
We  argue  that  design  that  is  influenced  by  kinesthetic 
emphatic  accounts  broaden  the  design  space  of  quantified 
pets. In specific it opens a discussion on what, such as new 
variables and aspects of dog life, to “quantify” and how to 
do it. We will now discuss these suggestions more in detail 
and also reconsider how to measure these new variables for 
pet informatics.  

First, we can use the study to discuss what is interesting to 
quantify  beyond  the  “physical  health  paradigm”.  In  the 
analysis,  we  identified  several  facets  of  the  dogs’  lives, 
including  the  pleasures  of  human-dog  relation,  dog-dog 
relations,  food, everyday activities,  seen from  an imagined 
perspective  of  their  dogs.  It  covers  several  aspects  of  the 
everyday  lifeworld  of  canines  where  “things,  activities, 
relations,  and  events  have  experiential  significance”  [9,  p. 
89].  

Second,  the  study  reveals  a  broad  range  of  actions  where 
technical  sensors  could  be  applied.  As  we  discussed,  the 
dominant  form  of  technology  in  previous  research  is  the 
accelerometer,  which  measure  changes in  movement  along 
various axes. However, if we align our suggested categories 
(presented  in  table  1)  with  common  sensor  technology,  a 
number  of  other  sensorial  dimensions  are  revealed.  It 
extends  the  technical  design  materials  to  other  types  of 
available sensors, as described in the following:  

Physical  and  temporal  facets:  A  GPS  would  sense  the 
whereabouts of the canine; the weather could be sensed by 
meteorological  sensors,  and  artifacts  could  be  interacted 
with 
is 
obviously measured by a clock. 

technology.  Temporality 

through  e.g.  RFID 

include  GPS 

two  objects.  Such  sensors 

Relational  and  situational  facets:  There  are  a  number  of 
sensors that measure aspects of relations, such as proximity 
between 
in 
combination  with  mobile  networks,  or  various  forms  of 
short-range  communication 
technologies  e.g.  Wi-Fi, 
Bluetooth  or  NFC.  Information  on  activities  and  events 
could  be 
analyzing 
combinations of different sensor data, e.g. whereabouts and 
movement  patterns,  to  identify  a  specific  activity  such  as 
dock diving or dog-dog play. 

and  measured  by 

identified 

Bodily  and inner facets:  Present  quantified  pet  technology, 
with its accelerometers, focus on physical activities such as 
sitting, smelling, walking etc. Sensors mentioned above, as 

well as tensiometers and biometrics can be used to quantify 
physical  activity.  Although  mental  activity  and  what  the 
dog  thinks,  is  common  in  the  dog  posts,  it  is  beyond  the 
scope of present technology to quantify those. Nonetheless, 
measuring dogs’ attitudes towards e.g. activities, places, or 
social  relations,  would  of course  be  fruitful  knowledge  for 
the dog owners. 

In sum, a study of kinesthetic empathic expression broadens 
the  scope  of  the  “quantified pet”  design agenda both  when 
it  comes  to  what  is  interesting  to  quantify  and  how  to 
measure  it.  Importantly,  our  study  does  not  specify  the 
applications  in  detail.  Rather,  it  suggests  an  interesting 
linkage  between  various  sensing  technologies  and  a  broad 
spectrum  of  animal  relevant  “quantifiable”  aspects  of  life. 
These can also be combined and correlated with each other 
to increase understanding of individual dogs. 

The  analysis  reveals  that  the  dogs’  perspectives  and 
experiences,  when  imagined  by  their  owners,  is  concerned 
with mundane things like social relations with other dogs as 
well  as  humans;  spatiality  and  the  physical  environment; 
physical  objects;  emotional  attitudes  and  various  set  of 
ordinary  activities.  This  implies  that  design  of  “quantified 
pets”  should  not  be  limited  towards  the  “physical  health 
paradigm”.  But  rather  to  focus  on  the  mundane  and 
ordinary  aspects  of  everyday  dog  life  that  possibly  can  be 
important and meaningful for them. There is more to dog’s 
wellbeing  than  physical  health,  e.g.  dog’s  social  life  with 
other dogs and humans, is also an important aspect that can 
be measured. 

CONCLUSION 
The interest in Animal-Computer Interaction (ACI), with a 
focus  on  designing  for  animals,  is  growing,  although  the 
development of methods in which to account for the users’ 
demands is at the beginning. This situation is also reflected 
in the design of “quantified pets” technology. We are faced 
with a challenge to design for users that cannot speak with 
human.  We  have  argued  for  an  increased  methodological 
creativity and pluralism, and a need of grounding design in 
detailed  empirical  studies  of  ordinary  dog  practices.  Our 
suggestion is to turn towards those humans that live closely 
with  the  animals,  but  not  just  interview  them.  Animals’ 
demands are not easily articulated without serious effort. A 
way  forward  is  to  piggy-back  on  those  accounts  in  social 
media  where  the  caretakers  acts  out  as  animals  by 
interpreting  the  subjective  lifeworlds  of  their  dogs.  By 
taking  part  of  ordinary  dog  owners  that  have  an  intimate 
day-to-day  relation  with  their  dogs,  and  their  spontaneous 
reflections in social media about their dogs’ lives from their 
dogs’  perspectives,  we  can  increase  our  understanding  of 
what  might  be  important  and  meaningful  for  companion 
dogs  as  well  as  for  their  owners  in  ordinary  dog-owner 
relationship.  Quantified  pet  technologies  could  further 
increase  such  knowledge  about  individual  dogs  for  the 
owners  and  provide  means  for  reflection  about  dog’s  life, 
which  in  turn  can  re-configure  their  everyday  lives  and 
relationships. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This  work  was  partly  funded  by Business  Finland  in  Turre 
and Toivoset 2.0 project. 

12.  Marta Dynel. 2016. “I Has Seen Image Macros!” 

Advice Animal Memes as Visual-Verbal Jokes. In: 
International Journal of Communication, 10, 660–688. 

REFERENCES 
1.  Shir Amir, Anna Zamansky, and Dirk van der Linden. 
2017. K9-Blyzer: Towards Video-Based Automatic 
Analysis of Canine Behavior. In: Proceedings of the 
Fourth International Conference on Animal-Computer 
Interaction (ACI2017). ACM, New York, NY, USA. 
2.  Fredrik Aspling, Oskar Juhlin, and Elisa Chiodo. 2015. 

Smelling, Pulling, and Looking: Unpacking 
Similarities and Differences in Dog and Human City 
Life. In: Proceedings of the 12th International 
Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment 
Technology (ACE '15). ACM, New York, NY, USA. 

3.  Fredrik Aspling, and Oskar Juhlin. 2017. Theorizing 

Animal–Computer Interaction as Machinations. In: 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 98, 
135–149.  

4.  Marc Beakoff. 2007. The Emotional Lives of Animals. 
A Leading Scientist Explores Animal Joy, Sorrow, and 
Empathy – and Why They Matter. New World Library. 
Novoto, California. 

5.  Mark Blythe and Paul Cairns. 2009. Critical Methods 

and User Generated Content: The iPhone on YouTube. 
In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '09). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 1467-1476. 

6.  Dorothy Cimino Brown, Raymon C. Boston and John 
T. Farrar. 2010. Use of an activity monitor to detect 
response to treatment in dogs with osteoarthritis. In: 
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical 
Association, 237(1), 66-70. 

7.  Elisabeth A. Bruno, James W. Guthrie, Stephan A. 

Ellwood, Richard J. Mellanby, and Dylan N. Clements. 
2015. Global positioning system derived performance 
measures are responsive indicators of physical activity, 
disease and the success of clinical treatments in 
domestic dogs. In: PloS one, 10(2), e0117094. 

8.  Rita Brugarolas, James Dieffenderfer, Katherine 

Walker, Ashley Wagner, Barbara Sherman, David 
Roberts, and Alper Bozkurt. 2014. Wearable wireless 
biophotonic and biopotential sensors for canine health 
monitoring. In: Proceedings of IEEE SENSORS 2014, 
2203–2206. 

9.  Eileen Christ. 1999. Images of Animals: 

Anthropomorphism and Animal Mind. Philadelphia: 
Temple University Press. 

10.  Vinciane Despret. 2013. From Secret Agents to 
Interagency. In: History & Theory, 52(4), 29. 

11.  Vinciane Despret. 2013. Responding Bodies and 
Partial Affinities in Human–Animal Worlds. In: 
Theory, Culture & Society, 30(7–8), 51–76.  

13.  Rebecca Eynon, Jenny Fry and Ralph Schroder. 2016. 
The Ethics of Internet Research. In Neil Fielding, 
Raymond M. Lee and Grant Black (Eds.). The SAGE 
Handbook of Online Research Methods (2nd Ed). 
SAGE Publications Ltd. 

14.  Charles Foster. 2016. Being a Beast: Adventures 

Across the Species Divide. New York: Metropolitan 
Books. 

15.  Fiona French, Clara Mancini, and Helen Sharp. 2017. 

Exploring Research through Design in Animal 
Computer Interaction. In: Proceedings of the Fourth 
International Conference on Animal-Computer 
Interaction (ACI2017). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
Article 2, 12 pages.  

16.  Goode, David. (2006). Playing with my dog Katie: An 

Ethnomethodological Study of Dog-Human Interaction. 
West Lafayette, Indiana: Purdue University Press. 

17.  Donald, R. Griffin. 2002. Afterword: What Is It Like? 
In: Marc Bekoff, et al. (Eds.). The Cognitive Animal: 
Empirical and Theoretical Perspectives on Animal 
Cognition. Cambridge: MIT press. 

18.  Ida Kathrine Hammeleff Jørgensen and Hanna 

Wirman. 2016. Multispecies methods, technologies for 
play. In: Digital Creativity, 27:1, 37-51. 

19.  Bernd Heinrich. 2000. Mind of the Raven. New York: 

Harper Collins. 

20.  Olivia Johnston-Wilder, Clara Mancini, Brendan 
Aengenheister, Joe Mills, Rob Harris, and Claire 
Guest. 2015. Sensing the shape of canine responses to 
cancer. In: Proceedings of the 12th International 
Conference on Advances in Computer Entertainment 
Technology (ACE '15). ACM, New York, NY, USA. 

21.  Admela Jukan, Xavi Masip-Bruin, and Nina Amla. 

2017. Smart Computing and Sensing Technologies for 
Animal Welfare: A Systematic Review. In: ACM 
Computing Surveys (CSUR), 50(1), 10. 

22.  Oskar Juhlin, Arvid Engström, and Reponen, E. 2010. 
Mobile Broadcasting: The What’s and How’s of Live 
Video as a Social Medium. In: Proceedings of the 12th 
International Conference on Human Computer 
Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services 
(CHI’10). ACM. New York, NY, USA, 35–44. 

23.  Klaus Krippendorff. 2004. Content Analysis: An 
Introduction to Its Methodology. London: Sage. 

24.  Eun Kyoung Choe, Nicole B. Lee, Bongshin Lee, 

Wanda Pratt, and Julie A. Kientz. 2014. Understanding 
quantified-selfers’ practices in collecting and exploring 
personal data. In: Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM 
conference on Human factors in computing systems 
(CHI '14). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 1143-1152. 

25.  Cassim Ladha, Nils Hammerla, Emma Hughes, Patrick 
Olivier, and Thomas Ploetz. 2013. Dog’s life: wearable 
activity recognition for dogs. In: Proceedings of the 
2013 ACM international joint conference on Pervasive 
and ubiquitous computing (UbiComp '13). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 415-418. 

26.  Richard J. Landis and Gary G. Koch. 1977. The 

Measurement of Observer Agreement for Categorical 
Data. In: Biometrics. 159-174 

27.  Eric Laurier, Ramia Maze, and Johan Lundin. 2006. 

Putting the Dog Back in the Park: Animal and Human 
Mind in Action. In: Mind, Culture, and Activity, 13(1), 
2-24. 

28.  Shaun Lawson, Ben Kirman, Conor Linehan, Tom 

Feltwell and Lisa Hopkins. 2015. Problematising 
Upstream Technology Through Speculative Design: 
The Case of Quantified Cats and Dogs. In: Proceedings 
of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '15). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 2663-2672. 

29.  Shaun Lawson, Ben Kirman, and Conor Linehan. 2016. 

Power, participation, and the dog internet. In 
Interactions 23, 4 (June 2016), 37-41.  

30.  Sirpa Leppänen. 2015. Dog Blogs as Ventriloquism: 
Authentication of the Human Voice. Discourse, 
Context & Media. Vol. 8, pp. 63–73.  

31.  Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A stage-
based model of personal informatics systems. In: 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ‘10). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, 557-566.  

Computer Studies, Volume 98, February 2017, Pages 
129-134. 

37.  Sean Mealin, Mike Winters, Ignacio X. Domínguez, 
Michelle Marrero-García, Alper Bozkurt, Barbara L. 
Sherman, and David L. Roberts. 2015. Towards the 
non-visual monitoring of canine physiology in real-
time by blind handlers. In: Proceedings of the 12th 
International Conference on Advances in Computer 
Entertainment Technology (ACE '15). ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, Article 66, 8 pages.  

38.  Robert W. Mitchell. 1997. Anthropomorphism and 
anecdotes: A guide for the perplexed. In Robert W. 
Mitchell, Nicholas S. Thompson, and H. Lyn Miles 
(Eds.), Anthropomorphism, anecdotes and animals, pp. 
407-427. Albany, NY: SUNY Press. 

39.  Cynthia Moss. 2000. Elephant Memories: Thirteen 
Years in the Life of an Elephant Family. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 

40.  Thomas Nagel. 1974. What Is It Like to Be a Bat? The 
Philosophical Review. Vol. 83, No. 4 (Oct., 1974), pp. 
435-450. 

41.  Jonathan K. Nelson, and Patrick C. Shih. 2017. 

CompanionViz: Mediated platform for gauging canine 
health and enhancing human–pet interactions. In: 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 
Vol. 98, pp. 169–178.  

42.  Steve North. 2017. Hey, where's my hay?: design 

fictions in horse-computer interaction. In: Proceedings 
of the Fourth International Conference on Animal-
Computer Interaction (ACI2017). ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, Article 17, 5 pages.  

32.  Mars PetCare US. 2016. Survey on Pets and Social 

43.  Susanna Paasovaara, Mikko Paldanius, Petri Saarinen, 

Media. Summary available at:  
http://www.mars.com/nordics/en/press-center/press-
list/news-releases.aspx?SiteId=94&Id=7159 (assessed 
20180104). 

33.  Clara Mancini. 2011. Animal-Computer Interaction: A 

Manifesto. In: Interactions. 18(4). ACM. 

34.  Clara Mancini, Janet van der Linden, Jon Bryan & 
Andrew Stuart. 2012. Exploring Interspecies 
Sensemaking: Dog Tracking Semiotics and 
Multispecies Ethnography. In: Proceedings of the 2012 
ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, pp. 143–
152. New York, NY, USA: ACM.  

35.  Clara Mancini, Rob Harris, Brendan Aengenheister, 
and Claire Guest. 2015. Re-Centering Multispecies 
Practices: A Canine Interface for Cancer Detection 
Dogs. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI '15). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2673-2682. 

36.  Clara Mancini, Shaun Lawson, and Oskar Juhlin. 2017. 
Animal-Computer Interaction: The emergence of a 
discipline. In: International Journal of Human-

Jonna Häkkilä, and Kaisa Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila. 
2011. The secret life of my dog: design and evaluation 
of paw tracker concept. In: Proceedings of the 13th 
International Conference on Human Computer 
Interaction with Mobile Devices and Services 
(MobileHCI '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 231-
240.  

44.  Mikko Paldanius, Tuula Kärkkäinen, Kaisa Väänänen-
Vainio-Mattila, Oskar Juhlin and Jonna Häkkilä. 2011. 
Communication technology for human-dog interaction: 
exploration of dog owners' experiences and 
expectations. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI '11). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2641-2650.  

45.  Dave Randall, Richard Harper, and Mark Rouncefield. 
2007. Fieldwork for Design: Theory and Practice. 
London: Springer. 

46.  John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and 
Matthew Chalmers. 2014. Personal tracking as lived 
informatics. In: Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI '15). New York, NY, USA: ACM.  

47.  Clinton R. Sanders. 1999. Understanding dogs: Living 
and working with canine companions. Philadelphia:  
Temple University Press. 

48.  Kenneth J. Shapiro. 1990. Understanding Dogs through 
Kinesthetic Empathy, Social Construction, and History. 
In; Anthrozoös. Vol. 3 (3).  

49.  Shirley Strum. 1987. Almost Human. New York: 

Random House. 

50.  Gary M. Weiss, Nathan Ashwin, JB Kropp, and Jeffrey 
W. Lockhart. 2013. WagTag: a dog collar accessory for 
monitoring canine activity levels. In; Proceedings of 
the 2013 ACM conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous 
computing adjunct publication (UbiComp '13). ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 405-414. 

51.  Kari Weil. 2012. Thinking Animals: Why Animal 

Studies Now? New York: Colombia University Press. 

52.  Alexandra Weilenmann & Oskar Juhlin. 2011. 
Understanding people and animals: the use of a 
positioning system in ordinary human-canine 
interaction. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI’11). New 
York: ACM, pp. 2631-2640.  

53.  Michelle Westerlaken, & Stefano Gualeni. 2016. 

Becoming with: towards the inclusion of animals as 
participants in design processes. In: Proceedings of the 
Third International Conference on Animal-Computer 
Interaction (ACI '16). ACM, New York, NY, USA. 

54.  Lisa Wood, Karen Martin, Hayley Christian, Andrea 
Nathan, Claire Lauritsen, Steve Houghto, Ichiro 
Kawachi, and Sandra McCune. 2014. The Pet Factor - 
Companion Animals as a Conduit for Getting to Know 
People, Friendship Formation and Social Support. In; 
PLoS ONE 10(4). 

55.  Gary Wolf. 2009. Know Thyself: Tracking Every Facet 

of Life, from Sleep to Mood to Pain, 24/7/365. Wired, 
July 2009, pp. 92-95.  

 
 
 
 
 
