Visual ODLs: Co-Designing Patient-Generated Observations of Daily 
Living to Support Data-Driven Conversations in Pediatric Care 

Matthew K. Hong1, Udaya Lakshmi1, Thomas A. Olson2, Lauren Wilcox1  

       1School of Interactive Computing 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
{mhong, udaya, wilcox}@gatech.edu 

2Aflac Cancer and Blood Disorders Center 
Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta 
thomas.olson@choa.org 

ABSTRACT 
Teens   with   complex   chronic   illnesses   have   difficulty   
understanding   and articulating symptoms such as pain and 
emotional  distress.    Yet,  symptom  communication  plays  a 
central  role  in  clinical  care  and  illness  management.    To 
understand how design can help overcome these challenges, 
we  created  a  visual  library  of  72  sketched  illustrations,  in-
formed  by  the  Observations  of  Daily  Living  framework 
along  with  insights  from  11  clinician  interviews.  We  uti-
lized  our  library  with  storyboarding  techniques,  free-form 
sketching,  and  interviews,  in  co-design  sessions  with  13 
pairs  of  chronically-ill  teens  and  their  parents.  We  found 
that  teens  depicted  symptoms  as  being  interwoven  with 
narratives of personal and social identity. Teens and parents 
were  enthusiastic  about  collaboratively-generated,  interac-
tive  storyboards  as  a  tracking  and  communication  mecha-
nism, and suggested three ways in which they could aid in 
communication  and  coordination  with  informal  and  formal 
caregivers. In this paper, we detail these findings, to guide 
the design of tools for symptom-tracking and incorporation 
of patient-generated data into pediatric care. 

Author Keywords 
Observations  of  Daily  Living;  Adolescents;  Family;  Com-
munication; Patient-Generated Health Data.  

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI): 
Miscellaneous; 

INTRODUCTION 
Many  teens  with  complex  chronic  illnesses  undergo  long-
term,  multi-phase  treatment  cycles,  such  as  chemotherapy. 
During  such  cycles,  successful  treatment  depends  in  large 
part  on  the  careful  balance  between  the  effectiveness  of  a 
therapy  and  its  toxicity  to  the  patient  [9].  Prior  work  on 
real-time  symptom-tracking  suggests  that  self-monitoring 
plays an important role in assessing treatment effectiveness, 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for com-
ponents  of  this  work  owned  by  others  than  ACM  must  be  honored.  Ab-
stracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post 
on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior  specific  permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.   
CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montreal, QC, Canada   
©  2018 Association for  Computing Machinery. ACM  ISBN 978-1-4503-
5620-6/18/04…$15.00   
https://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174050 

as  patients  can  experience  a  variety  of  treatment  effects  at 
home—between visits to the clinic [33]. 

Recognizing,  recording,  and  communicating  about  these 
effects  is  arduous  for  anyone  experiencing  them:  the  pro-
cess is often burdensome, unguided, and relies on retrospec-
tive  accounts  by  the  patient  [33].  These  complexities  are 
exacerbated for teens: on top of fluctuations in psychologi-
cal and physical development, already characteristic to their 
life stage, these young patients often face added emotional 
distress and cognitive strain resulting from medications and 
radiation therapy [19]. 

Ideally,  teens’  first-person  experiences  of  their  illness  and 
responses to therapy are foregrounded in clinical communi-
cation.  Yet,  given  the  demands  already  placed  on  these 
young patients, parents often monitor and provide reports of 
the illness experience: contributing critical perspectives and 
support  [34].  While  of  great  importance,  the  use  of  proxy 
reports alone can skew interpretations of the patient’s health 
while perpetuating communication that is based on approx-
imations [19]. We do not yet understand how to design col-
laborative  technology  to  capture  and  communicate  about 
subjective,  felt  experiences  of  teen  patients,  amid  fatigue, 
distress, and dynamic shifts in autonomy.  

Motivated  by  this  challenge,  we  turned  to  research  on  Pa-
tient-Generated  Health  Data  (PGHD)  to  create  a  visual  li-
brary of 72 sketched illustrations, informed by the Observa-
tions  of  Daily  Living  framework  [2].  The  framework  pro-
vides  a  useful  characterization  of  the  language  of  PGHD 
from  the  patient’s  perspective.  We  used  our  library  of 
ODLs  (henceforth  called  “Visual  ODLs”)  alongside  story-
boarding,  free-form  sketching  and  interviews,  to  engage 
teens as design partners [30,34,38,42] in co-design sessions 
with patients and their parents, to elicit illness experiences.  

In this paper, we describe how we adapted the ODL frame-
work to create our visual library. We illustrate how we used 
Visual  ODLs  in  co-design  sessions  with  13  patient–parent 
pairs to elicit a rich set of illness experiences to inform pe-
diatric  PGHD  technology.  Our  paper  further  contributes 
findings that teens depicted symptoms as being interwoven 
with  narratives  of  personal  and  social  identity—in  their 
storyboarding process, aspects of their identity were insepa-
rably  interwoven  into  their  illness  narratives.  Teens  and 
parents  were  enthusiastic  about  collaboratively-generated, 
digital storyboards as a tracking and communication mech-
anism.  They  suggested  that  visual  narratives  of  this  kind 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 476Page 1could aid in communication and coordination with informal 
and formal caregivers by: 

1.  Scaffolding the process of encoding symptoms through 
richer representations of context surrounding them and 
depictions of how they affect engagement in activities.  
2.  Enabling  coordinated  tracking  through  digital  story-
boards  in  which  scenes  authored  by  teens  and  family 
members are coalesced.  

3.  Allowing for fuller expression of important characteris-
tics  of  symptoms  through  visual  attributes  to  depict 
timing,  duration,  severity,  and  frequency,  and  through 
the integration of digital media to vary the representa-
tion of the experience. 

We complement these findings with 11 clinician interviews, 
and  subsequently  synthesize  patient,  parent  and  clinicians’ 
perspectives  to  discuss  opportunities  for  co-designing  col-
laborative  symptom-tracking  technology  to  support  data-
driven clinical communication.  

BACKGROUND 

PGHD and Observations of Daily Living 
Thanks to advances in multi-modal sensing and mobile and 
ubiquitous computing, research in Patient-Generated Health 
Data (PGHD) has gained momentum over the recent years, 
giving rise to new tools that capture patients’ health-related 
data in everyday (non-clinical) contexts [37]. Despite these 
advances, several barriers—spanning data capture, transfer, 
and  review—prevent  seamless  integration  of  PGHD  into 
clinical communication and practice.  

In  Brennan  and  Casper’s  lessons  learned  from  Project 
HealthDesign [3], a national PGHD initiative research pro-
gram,  the  authors  highlight  an  important  problem  that  pa-
tients faced when managing their health outside of the clin-
ical context: “not only were the traditional terminologies of 
health inadequate to express the phenomena of interest, but 
the very structure of the terms and the purpose they served 
in  the  individuals’  lives  were  markedly  different  from  the 
signs and symptoms terminology employed by clinicians to 
denote meaning in health.”  [2] 

Noting this mismatch between the information and commu-
nication needs of clinicians and patients, the authors identi-
fied  two  types  of  PGHD  that  inform  health  care:  1)  clini-
cian-defined  and  patient-generated,  and  2)  patient-defined 
and patient-generated health data. In their definition, clini-
cian-defined  and  patient-generated  data  are  assessments 
that professionals find important, but that must be gathered 
by the person experiencing daily life to contribute to those 
assessments.  An  example  of  clinician-defined and patient-
generated  data 
includes  Patient-Reported  Outcomes 
(PROs),  which  are  gradually  being  integrated  into  clinical 
workflows  as  standardized  instruments  to  measure  and 
compare treatment outcomes across multiple patients [10].  

On  the  other  hand,  patient-defined  and  patient-generated 
data reflect concepts that are uniquely defined and seen as 

important  by  the  patient,  that  can  occur  dynamically  and 
provide personal indicators of health status [3]. The authors 
introduce Observations of Daily Living, which is central to 
this  paper,  to  provide  an  organizing  framework  that  de-
scribes PGHD reflecting the patient’s perspective.  

Three  distinct  characteristics  of  ODLs  include:  status indi-
cators  that  describe  how  the  patient  is  feeling  (e.g.,  mood, 
energy  level,  appetite),  behavioral indicators  that  describe 
the  behavioral  context  of  the  health  status  or  what  the  pa-
tient  has  done  in  relation  to  a  particular  feeling,  and  expo-
sures  that  describe  the  socio-environmental  context.  The 
authors note that ODLs arise within the person’s life expe-
rience of health while having the flexibility to complement 
clinician-defined, patient-generated data.  

We asked how ODLs could be used as  a foundational lan-
guage  for  communicating  about  experiences,  and  support-
ing  awareness  of  those  experiences  coherently  across  the 
domains of both the clinic and everyday life. As such, Vis-
ual  ODLs  can  serve  as  boundary-negotiating  artifacts 
[26,39]  by  facilitating  three  kinds  of  boundary-negotiating 
work found to be important in personal health data contexts 
[7].  Supporting  self-explanation  of  experience  facilitates 
personal tracking and review, while the collaborative use of 
Visual ODLs serve to contribute to compilation artifacts, to 
facilitate  sharing  and  reconciling  information  among  teens 
and  family  members.  Finally,  Visual  ODLs  can  serve  as 
inclusion artifacts  to  facilitate  the  discussion  of  illness  ex-
periences  with  the  support  of  visual  aids  to  support  data-
driven medical conversations [7]. 

PGHD and Teens 
Eliciting  PGHD  effectively  from  individuals  in  everyday, 
naturalistic contexts is an ongoing area of research [24,33]. 
Previous  work  explored  real-time  tracking  of  PGHD 
through active and passive sensing tools as a means to im-
prove  patient–provider  communication  [7,33,36].  Yet, 
Hong  et  al.  [19]  found  that  teen  patients  and  their  parents 
faced significant difficulty tracking symptoms and reporting 
them to clinical caregivers—not due to a lack of communi-
cation channels but from an inability to capture and articu-
late patients’ experiences as they unfolded in daily life.  

However,  eliciting  experiential  data  from  teens  is  a  chal-
lenging  task:  most  teens  are  still  developing  the  necessary 
literacy  and  conversational  skills  required  to  articulate  un-
familiar  physical  sensations  and  emotions  [1].  In  parallel, 
toxic effects of treatment could compromise cognitive func-
tion,  which  in  turn  interferes  with  the  patients’  ability  to 
express these experiences [9]. This has significant implica-
tions for interaction design researchers employing interview 
techniques  that  rely  on  verbal  cues  and  patients’  recall  of 
illness  experiences.  Poole  and  Peyton  stated  that  many  re-
searchers  experience  difficulty  extracting  insights  from 
teens  through  qualitative  open-ended  questions,  in  part  be-
cause they have difficulty articulating responses [35]. 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 476Page 2The Need for Co-Design 
Teens’  participation  in  formative  studies  for  requirements 
gathering  can  be  aided  by  visual  artifacts  to  scaffold  their 
articulation  of  their  experiences  [12,17].  Co-design  tech-
niques  such  as  storyboarding  can  facilitate  the  process  of 
eliciting child-led narratives and design feedback [13,28].  

Comic-boarding  [32]  and  fictional  inquiry  [11]  have  been 
used with children to scaffold the ideation process, through 
visual  illustrations  that  provide  context  and  ideas  from 
which  children  can  extrapolate  [18].  We  similarly  aim  to 
establish  this  scaffold  through  visual  representations  of 
ODLs and scenarios to frame the storyboard narratives.  

TWO-PHASE STUDY 

Study Setting and Participants 
With IRB approval, we conducted our study at a large ter-
tiary pediatric hospital, at Children’s Healthcare of Atlanta 
(CHOA), in two Cancer and Blood Disorders Centers (one 
urban, one suburban) from March–September 2017.   

Clinicians Interviews 
We  conducted  individual  semi-structured  interviews  with 
11  clinicians  (9  oncologists  and  2  nurse  practitioners)  to 
understand how to design symptom monitoring technology 
for  complex  chronic  illness  treatment  in  ways  that  support 
the  pediatric  care  workflow.  Clinical  experience  ranged 
from 3 to 27 years (median=20).  

To  elicit  as  much  domain  knowledge  as  possible  about 
symptoms  relevant  to  their  practice,  we  used  the  Pediatric 
Memorial Symptom Assessment Scale (pMSAS) [8], a 30-
item  patient-rated  and  validated  instrument  developed  for 
teen  cancer  patients  aged  10–18,  to  elicit  clinician  expert 
knowledge  and  their  relevant  experiences  treating  cancer 
patients.  pMSAS  measures  multidimensional  aspects  of 
cancer-related  symptoms  ranging  from  physical  to  psycho-
logical and global symptom distress.  

We used pMSAS to draw out clinician perspectives on their 
communication with patients, with the most common symp-
toms  to  track  for  our  target  patient  population  (e.g.,  solid 
tumor,  leukemia  and  lymphoma  patients).  In  addition  to 
symptoms, we also inquired about seven behaviors (ranging 
from  physical  activity  to  sexual  activity)  that  clinicians 
would like to track in their patients. 

Questions  covered  times  that  clinicians  encouraged  symp-
tom  tracking,  types  of  symptoms  and  behaviors  that  are 
considered  important,  how  symptoms  are  currently  self-
reported in practice, appropriate timing for symptom track-
ing during the illness and care trajectory, and strategies for 
reconciling conflicting reports.  

Interviews  lasted  20–30  minutes  and  each  was  audio  rec-
orded  and  transcribed  for  analysis.  Two  researchers  con-
ducted analysis using inductive coding to iteratively gener-
ate themes until no new themes emerged. 

Clinician Interview Findings 
Patient experiences of interest to clinicians  
From  the  list  of  30  symptoms  presented  in  pMSAS,  we 
found  that  the  symptoms  most  important  for  decision-
making included: physical (lack of appetite, lack of energy, 
pain,  constipation,  vomiting,  mouth  sores,  nausea,  numb-
ness  in  hands/feet)  and  psychological  (sadness,  worry,  dif-
ficulty  sleeping)  symptoms,  as  well  as  behaviors  (physical 
activity, nutrition, medication tracking, and sleep duration).  

When  asked  about  specifics  of  these  symptoms,  clinicians 
told  us  that  it  is  important  to  know  how  symptoms  affect 
the  patients’  quality  of  life  [34].  We  also  found  that  most 
symptoms are evaluated in a descriptive manner.  

“Most of them [symptoms] don't have a scale. I would say 
pain's  really  the  only  one  we  use  a  scale  consistently  on. 
The  rest  is  just,  ‘What  do  you  mean  you're  drowsy?  How 
would  you  describe  that?’  [For]  numbness  of  hands  and 
feet, what I would say is, ‘How often is that happening? Are 
you having weakness with it? Can you open a bag of chips? 
Can you hold your pen?’ Those kinds of things.” –C3  

Role of symptom tracking in complex care 
When asked about the potential role that symptom tracking 
could  play  in  complex  chronic  care,  all  clinicians  agreed 
that patients’ self-reports of symptomatic experience would 
not  necessarily  impact  major  treatment  decisions  (e.g., 
chemotherapy  dosage),  but  would  help  them  make  deci-
sions  for  supportive  care  to  alleviate  secondary  effects  of 
the  treatment.  Clinicians  are  focused  on  attending  to  acute 
signs  of  treatment  outcomes  (e.g.,  blood  cell  counts)  and 
parents  call  in  when  their  child  is  experiencing  critical 
symptoms  (e.g.,  high  fever).  However,  both  clinicians  and 
parents  can  overlook  non-critical  factors  usually  occurring 
between visits that can still have long-term implications for 
treatment.  

“The critical things that may make them sick acutely, once 
again,  families  will  let  us  know.  [...]  I  think  it's  more  the 
dwindling  weight,  the  not  doing  physical  activities,  with-
drawing from the world, those are the things that are hard-
er for us to track because they can be more gradual.” –C1 

For  example,  psychological  symptoms  are  often  over-
looked,  but  very  important  to  track  because  it  interferes 
with the patients’ propensity to comply with treatment. 

“Sadness, worry, and difficulty sleeping […] are things that 
if we don't intervene early can become a problem, and lead 
to not wanting to take your meds, not showing up for your 
appointments, those kind of things.”–C3  

We  found  that  doctors  sometimes  find  it  difficult  to  get 
quality  of  life  input  from  patient  families.  Patients  and 
family  members’  perceive  doctors  in  oncology  clinics  as 
specialists treating “just the disease.” C2 stated how school 
attendance and performance is important to know to gauge 
treatment  effects  on  the  teen’s  attention  and  concentration, 
but families don’t discuss the subject with them. This could 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 476Page 3Figure 1. Co-Design Process. For each step in the co-design process (top-to-bottom) we describe the step, show relevant design artifacts from 
Visual ODLs and storyboard and the involved participants, and provide example data generated from that step in the co-design activity. 
Teenage patients are shown in blue, parents in purple. Semi-transparency indicates less involvement in an activity. 

be attributed to the parents’ worry of burdening the doctor 
with  extraneous  details  away  from  the  clinician’s  focus  on 
treating their child’s “illness.”  

Reconciling conflicting perspectives 
When  we  asked  how  clinicians  reconcile  when  teens  and 
parents  give  discrepant  reports  for  observable  symptoms 
(e.g., vomiting) two clinicians (C1, C7) told us they would 
opt  for  the  “worst  case”  to  avoid  misdiagnosis.  C7  men-

tioned that parents over-report and patients under-report, so 
in the end, parental reports are heard more in the clinic.  

Although  most  clinicians  understand  that  patient  reports 
should  carry  more  weight,  some  clinicians  (C3,  C4,  C8) 
told us they have difficulty deciding who to trust and would 
rely on cues such as mood and personality to make evalua-
tions on an individual family basis. For example, C3 told us 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 476Page 4 
she would at times trust the parents’ report more when the 
child seems to be emotionally unstable. 

One  strategy  that  clinicians  use  for  reconciliation  is  to  tri-
angulate  between  parent  reports,  teen  reports,  and  clinical 
data. C8 stated that she uses “objective data such as protein 
scores and weight” obtained under their supervision, to re-
solve conflicting reports about nutrition intake—a common 
point of contention. Still, we found that clinicians were re-
ceptive to the idea of collaborative tracking among patients 
and  parents.  C10  especially  elaborated  on  what  this  means 
for tracking nutrition intake.  

“Just as an example, I think that a teen should report lack 
of  appetite.  But  the  parent  should  help  report  what  they're 
actually eating because lack of appetite is subjective. But a 
parent can help provide objective information as an outside 
source  on  what  somebody's  eating  [...]  More  like  parents 
for checking, confirming.” -C10 

However, we found that verbal communication did not sat-
isfy  the  clinicians’  need  to  understand  what  happened  in-
between  the  visits.  C1  noted,  “There's  plenty  of  kids  [for 
whom] we'd like to stick a GoPro on their head and just see 
what happens for the two weeks in between when we don't 
see them. They come back and we're like: I would like to be 
in that house and see what's going on!” 

Co-Design Sessions with Patients and Parents 
Through convenience sampling guided by our inclusion and 
exclusion criteria and IRB-mandated clinician approval, we 
recruited 13 patients (M=8; F=5) who were 14–19 years old 
(mean=16.5).  Diagnoses 
(3), 
Ewing’s  Sarcoma  (2),  Rhabdomyosarcoma  (2),  Sickle  Cell 
Disease (2), and other form of solid tumor (4).  

included  Osteosarcoma 

Patients  were  currently  undergoing  treatment  (n=8)  or  had 
been treated within the last three months. Further inclusion 
criteria  included  the  mental  capability  to  participate  in  the 
study  (as  determined  by  a  supervising  physician),  and  the 
ability to speak English.  

To  better  understand  teens’  illness  experiences  while  re-
ceiving treatment, we conducted semi-structured interviews 
with  all  participants  using  storyboarding  with  scaffolding 
that included the use of Visual ODLs. The goal for the co-
design sessions was to understand how a digital storyboard-
ing  tool  with  Visual  ODLs  could  be  designed  to  enable 
tracking of symptoms and everyday illness experiences—to 
support  personal  review  and  communication  between  the 
patient and their family members as well as with clinicians.  

In  the  next  section,  we  first  introduce  Visual  ODLs  and 
then  detail  the  use  of  Visual  ODLs  with  storyboarding 
techniques to build patient narratives of illness experiences. 

Visual ODL Library 
We  took  guidance  from  Brennan  and  Casper’s  conceptual 
organization  of  ODLs  [2]  and  technology  probes  [20]  to 
construct a total of 72 pictograms, or sketched illustrations 
of  illness-related  experiences,  that  represent  people  (4), 

places  (13),  activities  (22),  symptoms  (13),  mood  (7), 
tools (8), descriptors (5)⎯all sketches were performed by 
the first author and appraised for clarity by the co-authors.* 
In our library, physical symptoms and mood indicate status 
indicators.  Activities  indicate  behavioral indicators,  while 
people and places indicate exposures. Our set of symptoms 
was identified from the pMSAS during clinician interviews.  

We  derived  activities  by  expanding  on  Activities  of  Daily 
Living (ADL) [22]. These ADLs include: 

•  Six  basic activities  of  daily  living  (e.g.,  eating,  bathing, 

dressing, toileting, locomotion) 

•  Everyday tasks (e.g., house chores, walking the dog) 

•  Self-care activities  (e.g.,  taking  medications,  taking  time 

alone) 

We  expanded  on  this  set  by  incorporating  activities  found 
to  be  important  through  clinician  interviews,  along  with 
activities common to the teenage lifestyle. 

•  Quality of life (e.g., sleep quality, socializing) 

•  Lifestyle-related activities (e.g., going to school, listening 
to music, using social media, playing video games, play-
ing sports)  

Similarly,  we  included  many  varieties  of  social  (people) 
(e.g. alone, with parent, with friend, etc.) and environmental 
contexts  (places)  to  ensure  coverage  (e.g.,  bedroom,  bath-
room,  classroom,  etc.).  However,  by  using  participant  nar-
ration along with Visual ODLs, we could (and did) flexibly 
sketch frames missing from our library. 

Descriptors  indicated  certain  temporal  patterns  (e.g.,  oc-
curring  overnight,  for  several  days,  etc.)  or  syntax  (e.g., 
can’t do) that describe how the individual status and behav-
ioral indicators manifested. Finally, tools described a set of 
media technologies (e.g., photo, video, chart, seen in Figure 
1) that the teen could bring into the storyboard, to indicate 
that they wished to capture or communicate an ODL using 
the tool. While patients in our study did not use those tools 
to  produce  content  for  the  design  sessions,  they  marked 
“placeholders”  in  their  storyboards  to  indicate  where  they 
would have liked to use them alongside sketched ODLs. 

In  summary,  Visual  ODLs  describe  a  visual  language  of 
patient  experiences,  encompassing 
its  vocabulary, 
grammar, and mechanism of expression that enables the 
patient’s  comprehension  and  communication  of  cap-
tured  observations  and  felt  illness  experiences.  By 
providing a visual language, we leveraged teen’s familiarity 
and favorable attitude towards using a visual conversational 
medium  while  capitalizing  on  their  recognition  (thereby 
lessening  cognitive  burden).  By  creating  design  artifacts 
with this form of ODLs, researchers can use them to draw 
out and collaboratively reconstruct illness experiences with 
family caregivers in co-design sessions.  

*

 http://www.hx.gatech.edu/visualodls 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 476Page 5                                                             
Co-Design Sessions with Semi-Structured Interviews 
After  obtaining  assent  and  consent  from  patient  families, 
we explained the storyboarding study procedure and asked 
patients  to  review  the  full  list  of  Visual  ODLs.  Interviews 
were conducted in isolated rooms or open spaces depending 
on the patient’s reason for visit. Some patients participated 
in the interview while receiving intravenous treatment (e.g., 
chemotherapy).  For  others,  interviews  were  interrupted  at 
times when clinicians came in for a physical exam. All in-
terviews lasted 30-45 minutes and were audio-recorded.  

Using a blank 4 x 3 panel storyboard template as a founda-
tion, we presented four scenarios to draw out illness-related 
experiences  and  preferences  regarding  the  imagined  use  of 
the technology for four scenarios (see Figure 2). Contrary to 
other  storyboard  scaffolding  approaches  [11,32]  that  start 
with a few pre-selected image panels to generate ideas, we 
chose  to  scaffold  the  storytelling  process  from  the  end  by 
adding the visual illustrations corresponding to each scenar-
io, in the last panel of the storyboard. End frames were re-
placed  sequentially with  each  new  scenario.  Providing  this 
scaffolding  for  the  storytelling  process  focused  on  co-
designing  the  beginning  and  intermittent  processes,  allow-
ing flexibility to ideate in-between and within Visual ODLs 
leading up to the resulting scenario of use. 

While walking through each scenario, we asked participants 
to  narrate  their  daily  experiences  while  undergoing  treat-
ment. The researcher quickly generated sketches with guid-
ance  from  the  patient  when  the  ODL  did  not  exist  in  our 
library.  We  kept  interview  topics  consistent  across  patient 
families  while  adapting  question  phrasing  to  each.  Topics 
addressed 1) challenges communicating illness experiences, 
2)  preferences  regarding  the  use  of  media  technology  to 
capture  experiences,  3)  opportune  moments  (researcher 
placed  circular  stickers  corresponding  to  the  scene)  to  en-
gage with symptom-tracking technology, and 4) patient and 
parent  attitudes  regarding  the  imagined  use  of  technology 
(outlined  in  Figure  1).  At  the  end  of  each  scenario,  the  re-
searcher used a camera to capture the resulting storyboard.  

Figure 2. Scenario I. Resultant storyboard of T12, an 
18-year-old osteosarcoma patient in treatment. 

Analysis 
All audio recordings were transcribed verbatim. Our analy-
sis  employed  a mixed deductive and inductive coding pro-
cess  [14].  Starting  with  a  top-down  approach  guided  by 
Brennan and Casper’s ODL framework [2], two researchers 
attached  codes  to  instances  of  status  indictors,  behavioral 
indicators  and  exposures  while  noting  emergent  themes 
through  bottom-up  coding.  Researchers  reached  consensus 
on a list of sub-themes through subsequent debriefings, then 
iteratively  coded  the  transcripts  until  no  new  themes 
emerged.  Emergent  themes  each  corresponded  to  specific 
scenarios. 

FINDINGS 
Below  we  organize  our  findings  by  scenarios:  I,  II  &  III, 
and  IV.  For  each  scenario,  we  highlight  relevant  excerpts 
from interviews as well as images of patient-generated sto-
ryboards with Visual ODLs. We use the labels ‘T’ and ‘P’ 
to  refer  to  teens  and  parents,  respectively.  Matching  num-
bers indicate a study pair (e.g., T2 and P2). 

Scenario I: Personal Review 
To introduce teen patients to ODLs, the first co-design sce-
nario focused on outlining everyday experiences using Vis-
ual  ODLs.  Through  this  scenario,  we  established  routine 
activities  and  learned  how  symptoms  and  other  aspects  of 
the illness experience unfolded with respect to them.  

Understanding everyday experiences with Visual ODLs 
For all patients undergoing treatment, we found consistency 
in  their  day-to-day  experience  in  terms  of  both  structured 
and unstructured activities that became routines. After con-
structing one day in a storyboard, T6 remarked, “Truly this 
is my typical day because after chemo, that's basically what 
I  do  all  the  time.”  However,  for  these  patients,  symptoms 
presented  themselves  unpredictably.  T11  illustrated  this 
when  commenting,  “Sometimes  you'll  be  in  pain.  Some-
times  you'll  be  nauseous,  sometimes  tired.  Some  days  it'll 
all hit you at once.”  

Our  most  interesting  insights  came  from  patients’  reflec-
tions  on  their  narrated  experiences  expressed  as  Visual 
ODLs  on  the  storyboard.  We  found  that  the  Visual  ODLs 
enabled  expression  of  symptoms  by  1)  enabling the inclu-
sion of surrounding context to better articulate them, and 2) 
scaffolding how they affected the teen’s ability to engage in 
daily  activities.  For  example,  most  patients  (T2–T13)  de-
scribed  their  symptoms  first  in  relation  to  activities  and 
surrounding physical context, drawing attention to how the 
symptoms  affected  routine  activities  (e.g.,  eating,  locomo-
tion and sleep).  

Regarding  pain,  T9  told  us,  “with  the  mouth  sores  […]  I 
was  having  to  spit  a  lot,  and  because  of  the  pain,  I  really 
couldn't  stay  asleep.”  Regarding  fatigue,  T10  said  that 
walking  and  climbing  stairs  in  school  made  her  feel  tired, 
while  T13  described  how  bathing  would  make  him  feel 
sleepy,  “When I'm taking a bath I get real sleepy for some 
reason […] and I'll end up laying on the bottom of the tub 
while taking a shower and being asleep.” Regarding mood, 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 476Page 6 
 
 
 
 
T12 associated the need to take pills with sadness: “Feeling 
sad,  probably,  at  the  same  time  as  the  initial  [pain]—and 
then during—when I'm taking the pills” (Figure 2). 

We further discovered that teens’ understanding and encod-
ing of these associations involved noting the timing, such as 
onset  and  duration,  frequency,  intensity  or  impediment  of 
specific  activities.  The  visual  cues  denoting  such  de-
scriptors  aided  this  process,  by  providing  the  grammar  for 
characterizing how the ODLs manifested in routine actions. 
For example, T9 mentioned using the “can’t do” descriptor 
to  indicate  how  the  mouth  sores  disturbed  his  sleep,  “That 
could add more detail to ‘can't sleep’—the ‘can't do’ part.”  

In  addition,  focusing  on  details  about  how  the  status  and 
behavioral  indicators  interacted  helped  teens  identify  pat-
terns of their lived experience (T1, T4, T8-11, T13). T10’s 
comment  especially  highlighted  this  need  as  she  recently 
started  school,  “I guess it would be helpful if I started see-
ing patterns. Like, if I don't sleep well, then I'm more nau-
seous.  […]  Maybe  how  much  I  ate,  because  some  days  I 
pack  my  lunch  and  I  won't  be  able  to  eat  as  much  during 
the day. And like, I have different class schedules on differ-
ent days, and different symptoms, too.”  

We found that being able to understand these relationships 
in  better  detail  was  particularly  important  and  motivating 
for teens as it could help them discover behavioral quirks to 
alleviate unwanted symptoms. As T8 put it, “I think just to 
be  able  to  document  when  I'm  not  feeling  good  and  how  I 
feel, and then be able to relate from past times and then see 
what I did to make myself feel better, and to be able to do 
that  again,  and  then  trying  to  I  guess  test  out  things  that 
will make me happy, even if I'm not feeling good.” 

Opportune moments to contribute ODL data 
Of  course,  collecting  data  from  chronically  ill  teens  is  not 
an easy task. To better understand when and how to engage 
teens  in  entering  their  illness  experience,  we  asked  about 
opportune moments to log daily ODL data.  

We found that most teens preferred to contribute ODL data 
in  association  with  an  activity.  They  tied  these  times  to 
their  daily  routine  indicating  a  time  of  day  such  as  before 
going  to  bed  (T6–8,  T10,  T12),  upon  waking  up  (T4,  T8, 
T10,  T11),  while  using  the  phone  (T5,  T10,  T13),  eating 
lunch (T4), and taking medication (T6).  

On  the  other  hand,  three  teens  (T4,  T9,  T11)  said  they 
would  enter  data  immediately  after  experiencing  a  symp-
tom. Qualitative analyses revealed that teens are most likely 
to be available on their mobile phone or would be reminded 
to enter their story in the vicinity of said activities. For in-
stance,  T6  said  that  coupling  moments  of  data  entry  with 
self-care activities such as taking pills would remind him to 
use  the  storyboard:  “maybe  when  I  go  to  bed  to  take  my 
medicine. Yeah. Taking pills and stuff. It would remind me 
its 8:00pm–time to take meds. Then go to bed.” T5 appreci-
ated having a visual vocabulary, mentioning that she would 
choose  an  activity  that  could  provide  more  psychological 

comfort  in  response  to  a  symptom  rather  than  making  an 
effort to log data about her experience. 

 “If  I  have  energy  to  listen  to  music  and  draw  or  enter  in 
more  stuff  about  how  shitty  I'm  feeling,  then  I'm  probably 
going to want to listen to music and draw. So if there were 
an easy template [referring to Visual ODLs] that I could fill 
in, [I could] grow accustomed to using [it] rather than hav-
ing  to  express  it  using  my  brain  power.  Sometimes  words 
are not so easy to find, I feel scatterbrained. So it would be 
easier if there were suggestions already there.”  

Scenario II & III: Communication with Family Members 
Our  second  and  third  scenarios  pursued  insights  into  how 
family  members  could  work  together  to  contribute  their 
observations  of  the  patient’s  experience.  In  reporting  the 
findings, we combine and highlight findings from both co-
located (II) and remote communication (III) scenarios. 

Conflicting observations 
Overall,  parents  became  involved  in  the  co-design  process 
to  contribute  their  own  observations  and  perspectives. 
When we asked what each teen and parent understand best 
about  the  patient  experience,  teens  focused  on  describing 
personally  felt  experiences  (both  physical  and  emotional) 
along with how they affected activities that they valued. In 
contrast, parents filled in "meta-level" details such as time, 
location, or frequency of events. T9 illustrated this point, "I 
think,  I  believe  she  would  be  able  to  help  out  with  those 
things. But I was talking about pain or the symptoms; those 
would be more of a personal thing because only you really 
know how much it hurts and all that. It would be harder to 
explain  it  to  someone  else.  I  think  she'd  [P9]  be  better  at 
tracking [the] time [of the symptom] than me."  

However, these details often led to conflicting views about 
what  actually  happened—a  consideration  for  co-design  in 
this domain. For example, T4 and P4 argued over the teens 
ability  to  recognize  symptoms.  P4:  “I'm  not  a  doctor  or 
anything,  but  if  she  hasn't  peed  for  like  eight  hours,  okay, 
something's  wrong,  where  she  may  not  think  …”  with  T4 
responding,  “If  I  haven't  peed  in  eight  hours,  I'm  going  to 
say something. I'm sorry, I knew this wasn’t going to work.” 

Through  analyses  of  interviews,  we  found  one  reason  that 
may contribute to conflicting perspectives. Because parents 
had  significant  difficulty  understanding  how  their  child  is 
feeling, they relied on subtext, including visual cues such as 
body language or the child's ability or intention to engage in 
everyday mundane activities. For instance, P11 told us that 
he would be able to gauge T11's experiences by reading his 
body  language:  “his  demeanor  of  his  body  or  body  lan-
guage would tell us ... when he's not feeling good or when 
his counts were low, that we needed to stop watching, when 
to  start  [keeping]  an  eye  on  him,  and  when  he  was  okay.” 
P6  took  hints  from  her  son's  social  activity:  “I know when 
you were bad you didn't talk too much to anybody.”  

While reading body language and behavior helped provide 
some  context,  this  approach  is  more  applicable  to  symp-

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 476Page 7toms  and  activities  that  are  outwardly  observable.  For  in-
stance, P9 expressed difficulty asking about activities such 
as  toileting  that  are  deemed  private,  "sometimes  I  have  to 
ask  him,  like  his  bowel  habits.  He  doesn't  tell  me  when  he 
goes to the bathroom what's going on, so I usually have to 
ask him."  

Indeed, inferring emotions was most challenging for parents 
(P4–6,  P11–13).  As  P13  explained,  “Sometimes  the  kids 
don't  want  to  talk  to  you.  He'll  get  those  times  where  he's 
completely  silent.  […]  then  sometimes  he'll  talk  to  some-
body  else  before  he  talks  with  me.  He  might  need  time  to 
talk to me.” Teens  too,  had  difficulty  expressing  emotions 
in  front  of  their  parents,  but  made  use  of  emotions  when 
storyboarding.  T11  told  us  that  emotions  are  difficult  to 
communicate  because  his  reason  for  sadness  directly  in-
volved  the  absence  of  his  family.  “I'd let them know if I'm 
hurting.  […]  I  usually  don't  let  them  know  if  I'm  sad  or 
whatever. The sad part, I'm not sad about being in the hos-
pital. I'm just sad being away from the rest [of the family].”  

Despite such difficulty, we found that visual representations 
could  provide  an  alternative  means  for  teens  (T6,  T9)  to 
express  their  emotions.  T6  said,  “it's  a  lot  easier  with  the 
pictures because it shows you how mad you are. A picture 
will  explain  how  mad,  visualize  how  mad  you  were,  how 
sick you were, how tired, dizzy or something.”  P6  also  ap-
preciated  the  need  for  Visual  ODLs:  “It'd  help  me  under-
stand if he couldn't express to me. […] Someone not going 
through it–you don't know how they really feel.” 

Tensions around adherence  
In addition to understanding physical and emotional experi-
ences, another point of contention between parent and teens 
involved  parents  reminding  their  child  to  adhere  to  care 
activities, such as taking pills. P10 raised her concern, espe-
cially  drawing  attention  to  her  daughter’s  imminent  return 
to  college:  “as a parent, and she's away at college, I worry  
she's not taking her medicine when she should be, her pills 
[…] And I know she's busy, so to me it would be helpful if I 
knew,  oh  yeah,  she  just  put  in  that  she  took  it,  so  I  don't 
have to ask her, you know?”  

Many  teens  also  told  us  they  disliked  being  reminded  to 
adhere to self-care activities. Interestingly, both parents and 
teens  saw  value  in  using  digital  storyboarding  as  a  way  to 
log  and  acknowledge  confirmation  of  self-care  tasks.  Sup-
porting identification and communication of self-care activ-
ities is especially important for teens with chronic illnesses. 
These patients are reconciling the need for support with the 
rites  of  passage  associated  with  the  transition  to  adulthood 
[35], such as being responsible for taking their own medica-
tions.  Their  storyboard  revealed  how  this  reconciliation 
played  out  in  their  everyday  lives,  and  how  it  interacted 
with aspects of self-identify beyond their illness. 

We  also  received  positive  responses  toward  the  imagined 
use of digital storyboarding technology as a way to collabo-
ratively  contribute  unique  observations  of  the  patient’s  ill-

Figure 3. Scenario II. Storyboard of T13, a 15-year-old 
osteosarcoma patient in treatment. 
ness experience. Parental caregivers, who already had prior 
experience  tracking  for  the  patient,  were  receptive  to  this 
idea. P4 told us that she could offer to help generate the list 
of routine activities for her daughter T4. “We could proba-
bly  make  a  list,  I  mean,  of  her  everyday  routine,  because 
she's not in school right now, because it's summer … I don't 
work,  so  our  focus  right  now  is  just  her,  and  getting  her 
through  this  treatment,  so,  our  life  is  very  boring.  So,  we 
could easily map a whole day out.”  On  a  related  note,  T13 
said that his mother (P13) could help him capture everyday 
patient  experiences  through  media  tools,  “I  would  ask  my 
mom  to  record  me  after  I'm  done  sitting  down,  how  I  feel 
when  I'm  brushing  my  teeth  and  how  I  change  and  what 
music does for me, how I feel.”  

Perhaps the most important lesson we took away from sce-
narios II and III is that both patients and the parent partici-
pants  saw  the  value  of  collaborative  construction  of  story-
boards  as  a  point  of  mediation  to  resolve  conflicting  
perspectives. T9 posited that tracking ODLs could serve as 
a point of reference to resolve discrepant recollections of an 
observed  experience,  “but I think that [storyboard technol-
ogy]  would  help  clear  it  up.  Like  with  me  a  lot,  my 
memory's  not  been  the  best  recently,  with  all  the  stuff 
[chemotherapy] that's going on. So usually it would be me 
saying something what I believe is correct, and she'll [P9] 
see  it  some  other  way.  And  if  I  did  record  it  when  it  hap-
pened, then we could just go back and look at that, and that 
would help a lot.” 

Scenario IV: Communication with Clinicians 
Before  starting  the  storyboarding  process,  we  first  asked 
teens  about  existing  challenges  when  communicating  with 
their clinician. Several teens (T5, T7–T10, T13) stated hav-
ing  difficulty  talking  to  clinicians  when  they  needed  to  re-
call  illness  experiences.  This  included  recalling  the  timing 
of the onset of symptoms and recalling behavioral triggers. 
T13  explained,  “I  was  trying  to  tell  her  what  things  that  I 
do  that  makes  my  energy  go  down  but  I  keep  forgetting.” 
Other  challenges  related  to  discussing  severity.  T6  men-
tioned his trouble “communicating with the doctors explain-
ing it's not excruciating pain—it's just a little bit.”  

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 476Page 8 
Expressing symptoms 
Although  teens  were  accustomed  to  the  use  of  clinical 
scales,  they  had  difficulty  translating  felt  experience  into 
numbers.  Further  analyses  revealed  that  teens  preferred  to 
express  their  symptoms  in  terms  of  how  they  affected  the 
ability  to  engage  in  everyday  activities.  When  asked  how 
he’d  like  to  communicate  his  feelings  to  the  clinician,  T6 
responded:  “It's  like  how  I'm  doing  something.  […]  Some-
times  I  have  to  get  up  and  take  the  showerhead  down. 
That's difficult.”  

For less severe symptoms, T10 suggested combining differ-
ent representations for concurrent or related symptoms. An 
example of combining facial expressions with other activi-
ties helped outline this aspect of such symptom experienc-
es:  “If  I  was  so  nauseous  that  I  couldn't  eat,  or  if  I  like 
threw up, I could put that on there, but usually it's not that 
severe... more like, make different faces, I guess, instead of 
neutral, I would be sad.” T7  concurred  that, “I would just 
tell [the doctor], but my facial expression would show it.”  

Overall,  teens  showed  excitement  about  the  potential  for 
digital  storyboarding  to  support  their  communication  of 
illness  experiences  with  clinicians.  T8  expressed  this  ex-
citement enthusiastically: “This would be really awesome to 
have  to  be  able  to  put  down  even  a  tiny  detail  of  just  like, 
this is how I felt this day at this time, that kind of stuff. On 
this day I was feeling great, but then the next day I started 
feeling worse…then I had a fever. That kind of stuff.” 

Preferences for Integration of Media Technology 
Going  from  scenarios  I  to  IV,  we  found  that  the  types  of 
digital  media  technology  teens  preferred  to  use  to  capture 
and articulate specific ODLs did not change. However, we 
learned that their choice of technology varied based on the 
level of expressiveness required to encode how they wanted 
to capture and communicate the ODLs. Below, we highlight 
four ways in which they preferred to communicate ODLs. 

Physical symptoms: video 
Video  was  preferred  in  cases  where  there  was  a  need  to 
capture the most complex aspect of the teens’ illness expe-
rience:  ‘how’  ODLs  (e.g.,  symptoms,  activities,  environ-
ment,  etc.)  interact  with  each  other.  As  mentioned  earlier, 
teens  (T5,  T7–8,  T13)  wanted  to  capture  the  extent  of  a 
physical  symptom  by  recording  how  it  affects  a  mundane 
activity such as eating and dressing: T7 indicated his pref-
erences, saying “Videos […] to see how I acted. So you can 
see where I eat, or when I get dressed.”  

Not  only  did  teens  see  video  as  a  tool  for  capturing  and 
expressing the illness experience, they also anticipated that 
videos  would  be  more  engaging  for clinicians.  T5 was op-
timistic  about  the  potential  for  video  to  foster  positive  pa-
tient–clinician interactions, “Next time I come in, the nurses 
will be like, ‘that was such a cool video […] of your foot!’”  

Mood: sketches, photos, and charts 
Preferences  for  capturing  emotion,  a  highly  subjective  and 
complex  experience,  were  mixed.  Through  storyboarding, 

teens  indicated  that  everyday  visual  depictions  of  facial 
expressions could be a better way relate their mood to clini-
cians. Among those who responded, many teens (T3, T5–6, 
T9) preferred to use sketches from our Visual ODL library, 
and  photos  (T2,  T7)  to  show  their  own  facial  expressions. 
Yet we found some teens (T3, T7) also needed to use other 
tools  in  combination  to  express  different  aspects  of  their 
mood, such as the use of charts to indicate fluctuating emo-
tions  over  several  days.  T7  expressed  this  sentiment:  “I 
mean  probably  a  chart.  Chart  along  with  the  phone.  You 
see  my  highs  and  lows  […]  mood  swings  happen  almost 
every day.” 

Reminding and journaling: voice recording 
Audio or voice recording was seen as a reminder and jour-
naling tool to aid the patients’ experiencing cognitive diffi-
culties  and  fatigue.  Some  teens  (T5,  T13)  chose  to  record 
their voice as a way to make journal entries instead of writ-
ing  and  to  aid  their  memory  (T1,  T6,  T13).  T13  saw  this 
tool as a way to seek psychological support outside of face-
to-face  contact:  “If  I  record  they  [psychologists]  already 
would  know  and  they  could  come  and  talk  to  me  about 
those  things  […]  I  don't  like  to  always  have  people  in  my 
face and talking to people because it's boring. [...] Basical-
ly I get distracted easily. You can't get distracted from your 
phone because you're always on it.”  

Diet: photo 
For  some  teens  (T8–9,  T13),  taking  photos  of  their  meal 
was the easiest way to keep track of what they ate as well as 
indicate  their  appetite.  As  T8  noted,  “Probably just to say 
what I ate and was I too nauseous to eat. Was I really hun-
gry  so  I  ate  a  lot,  or  just  snacked  all  day?  [...]  I  could 
probably take a picture of the food before and after and list 
how much I ate.” 

DISCUSSION 
Below,  we  first  situate  our  findings  with  respect  to  prior 
work  in  personal  and  family  informatics.  We  then  discuss 
the integration of Visual ODLs into clinical care.  

Personal  Informatics:  Activities  as  a  Scaffold  for  Semi-
Automated Tracking 
Through  the  first  scenario,  we  learned  that  patients  under-
going  treatment  have  highly  personal  and  individualized 
routines  for  everyday  activities.  While  daily  entries  could 
be  a  burden,  encoding  routines  in  advance  could  scaffold 
the  capture  of  data  related  to  activities  and  lessen  the  bur-
den  of  data  collection.  For  example,  T5  suggested  that 
ODLs could be used to construct a baseline routine. “Like if 
you give an update and then you went in the next day, there 
could be a last time option.”  

The frequent placement of symptoms with activities in our 
design sessions suggests that there are opportunities to lev-
erage  the  highly-structured,  routine  nature  of  teens’  daily 
lives  in  storyboarding  technology.  There  is  a  current  em-
phasis  on  tracking  personal  health  based  on  a  broad  inter-
pretation  of  activities  (e.g.,  physical  activity,  sleeping)  [6]. 
We  found  that  patients  were  able  to  relate  better  to  micro-

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 476Page 9level  activities  such  as  getting  in-and-out  of  bed,  brushing 
their teeth or reaching for a showerhead. Micro-level activi-
ty  routines,  authored  by  the  user  in  advance,  could  reduce 
the burden of daily logging. These activities can also serve 
as  triggers  to  help  recognize  unpredictable  symptoms.  Es-
tablishing daily routines could be used both for manual and 
semi-automated tracking [5] to elicit data at opportune mo-
ments. For instance, given prior knowledge that nausea and 
fatigue  are  both  experienced  as  a  symptom  cluster† when 
the patient brushes their teeth, a system could prioritize the 
suggestion of those symptoms when the patient is engaged 
in that activity. 

Family Informatics: Collaborative Re-construction of the 
Patient’s Illness Experience 
The  HCI  and  Health  Informatics  communities  have  con-
tributed much to the growing body of PGHD research [37]. 
Yet, work considering the family as a unit for the design of 
technology  is  still  emerging  [34].  Symptoms  are  highly 
individual,  often  subjective  experiences  (e.g.,  nausea  and 
fatigue).  Tracking  the  direct,  felt  experience  is  important, 
and  tools  should  elicit  input  from  both  patients  and  family 
caregivers [4,19]. Pina et al. found that families preferred to 
consider  both  caregivers  and  children  as  trackers,  and  to 
distribute the burden of tracking among the family [34].  

In  our  study,  family  members  as  well  as  clinicians  found 
value  in  the  use  of  collaborative  digital  storyboarding  to 
resolve and reconcile different perspectives. Both teens and 
parents  in  our  study  were  aware  that  when  accounting  for 
symptoms,  both  perspectives,  though  different,  are  valua-
ble. T9’s remark (Scenarios II & III) suggested that patients 
understand they are  the “experiencer” of their own subjec-
tive feelings (e.g., pain, emotion, etc.) while parental care-
givers  mentioned  tracking  “objective”  details  (e.g.,  time, 
location, frequency, etc.) of symptoms. In this case, digital 
storyboarding  tools  that  make  use  of  Visual  ODLs  could 
support  collaborative  work  among  family  members  by 
providing distinct roles for each stakeholder.  

Visual ODLs in Clinical Care 
Several  barriers  must  be  overcome  to  integrate  Visual 
ODLs into clinical care [41]. Recently, several studies have 
identified and classified factors that contribute to barriers in 
data-driven  clinical  communication  [7,23,31,36,41].  Com-
mon themes in these studies include clinicians’ concern for 
the reliability of patient-captured data and its interoperabil-
ity with clinicians’ existing practice.  

If primarily used outside of clinical care, symptom-tracking 
technology can facilitate greater awareness of illness expe-
riences  and  support  verbal  reports  in  the  clinic  [33].  This 
ability  alone  is  valuable:  patients  undergoing  complex 
treatments such as chemotherapy can suffer from cognitive 
impairments (referred to as having a ‘chemo-brain’ [21]). In 
the clinic, a tracking tool could support weekly and monthly 

†

Symptom  clusters  describe  the  co-occurrence  of  a  specific  set  of  symp-
toms for a given illness or effects of treatment [25]. 

reports indicating the most frequent, the most severe, or the 
most disruptive symptoms, and could be designed to allow 
for searching by these criteria—a capability that we plan to 
explore in future work. 

Reviewing  large  amounts  of  patient-generated  data  could 
place  a  burden  on  clinicians.  Lee  and  Dey’s  study  of  sen-
sor-based ODLs describes opportunities to leverage nursing 
triage  assessments  to  leverage  existing  practice  for  data 
review [27]. Emerging work in sensing, analysis and visual-
ization  could  also  ease  the  burden  of  review  for  multiple 
caregivers.  Hartzler  et  al.  demonstrated  the  feasibility  of 
incorporating PGHD into cancer care through visualization 
techniques [16].  

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Through the co-design process, we learned that using paper 
to conduct design activities in the clinic was difficult due to 
limited  space,  especially  when  needing  room  for  design 
artifacts. We used the hospital bed, carts, and any surfaces 
wide  enough  to  place  storyboard  materials—our  ability  to 
fully  capture  the  patient-narrated  experience  was  limited. 
This  research  is  also  limited  in  our  focus  on  oncology  and 
hematology-related  conditions,  which  are  categorized  as 
complex chronic conditions [15]. (See [19] for a description 
of its relevance to the larger context of our study.) 

Thus,  our  findings  may  not  necessarily  transfer  to  other 
types  of  chronic  conditions  such  as  obesity  or  diabetes. 
With  the  introduction  of  PGHD  comes  the  need  to  review 
and incorporate it into health record systems. However, we 
did  not  investigate  the  workflow  considerations  or  opera-
tional  factors  involved  in  data  transmission,  clinical  han-
dling  or  response  protocols.  Though  these  are  beyond  the 
scope of our current study, they are important areas that we 
plan to investigate in subsequent studies. 

CONCLUSION 
In  this  paper,  we  introduce  Visual  ODLs  and  examine  its 
use  as  design  artifacts  to  elicit  complexities  of  symptom-
related communication faced by teens with complex chron-
ic illnesses. Through co-design activities to envision digital 
storyboarding technology with Visual ODLs, we generated 
storyboards  representing  the  teens'  reconstructions  of  their 
felt  experiences.  The  material  presence  of  Visual  ODLs 
provided  scaffolds  to  structure  in-depth  discussions  about 
how to foster communication with both family and clinical 
caregivers using patient-defined and patient-generated data. 
Our  future  work  will  examine  approaches 
to  semi-
automated  tracking  in  the  space  of  collaborative  construc-
tion  of  Visual  ODLs  and  storyboarding.  A  central  design 
tension includes the need to reduce the burden placed on a 
user  experiencing  illness,  while  enabling  full  expressive 
capabilities to capture and represent their felt experience.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  thank  all  study  participants  and  the  clinic  staff.  This 
work was supported by NSF #1652302.  

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 476Page 10                                                             
REFERENCES 
1. 

Raewyn Bassett, Brenda L. Beagan, Svetlana 
Ristovski-Slijepcevic, and Gwen E. Chapman. 
2008. Tough Teens: The Methodological 
Challenges of Interviewing Teenagers as Research 
Participants. Journal of Adolescent Research 23, 2: 
119–131. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/0743558407310733 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

9. 

Patricia Flatley Brennan and Gail Casper. 2015. 
Observing health in everyday living: ODLs and the 
care-between-the-care. Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing 19, 1: 3–8. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-014-0805-0 

Patricia Flatley Brennan, Stephen Downs, and Gail 
Casper. 2010. Project HealthDesign: rethinking the 
power and potential of personal health records. 
Journal of biomedical informatics 43, 5: S3–S5. 

Yunan Chen, Victor Ngo, and Sun Young Park. 
2013. Caring for caregivers: designing for 
integrality. Proceedings of the 2013 conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work, ACM, 91–
102. 

Eun Kyoung Choe, Saeed Abdullah, Mashfiqui 
Rabbi, et al. 2017. Semi-Automated Tracking: A 
Balanced Approach for Self-Monitoring 
Applications. IEEE Pervasive Computing 16, 1: 
74–84. http://doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2017.18 

Eun Kyoung Choe, Nicole B. Lee, Bongshin Lee, et 
al. 2014. Understanding quantified-selfers’ 
practices in collecting and exploring personal data. 
Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference 
on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’14, 
ACM Press, 1143–1152. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557372 

Chia-Fang Chung, Kristin Dew, Allison M Cole, et 
al. 2016. Boundary Negotiating Artifacts in 
Personal Informatics: Patient-Provider 
Collaboration with Patient-Generated Data. 
Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on 
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing - CSCW ’16, ACM Press, 768–784. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819926 

John J. Collins, Maura E. Byrnes, Ira J. Dunkel, et 
al. 2000. The Measurement of Symptoms in 
Children with Cancer. Journal of Pain and 
Symptom Management 19, 5: 363–377. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/S0885-3924(00)00127-5 

Pippa G. Corrie. 2008. Cytotoxic chemotherapy: 
clinical aspects. Medicine 36, 1: 24–28. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.mpmed.2007.10.012 

10. 

11. 

12. 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

Prasanna R Deshpande, Surulivel Rajan, B Lakshmi 
Sudeepthi, and C P Abdul Nazir. 2011. Patient-
reported outcomes: A new era in clinical research. 
Perspectives in clinical research 2, 4: 137–44. 
http://doi.org/10.4103/2229-3485.86879 

Christian Dindler and Ole Sejer Iversen. 2007. 
Fictional Inquiry—design collaboration in a shared 
narrative space. CoDesign 3, 4: 213–234. 
http://doi.org/10.1080/15710880701500187 

Sarah E. Drew, Rony E. Duncan, and Susan M. 
Sawyer. 2010. Visual Storytelling: A Beneficial But 
Challenging Method for Health Research With 
Young People. Qualitative Health Research 20, 12: 
1677–1688. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/1049732310377455 

Jerry Alan Fails, Mona Leigh Guha, and Allison 
Druin. 2012. Methods and Techniques for 
Involving Children in the Design of New 
Technology for Children. Foundations and 
Trends® in Human–Computer Interaction 6, 2: 85–
166. http://doi.org/10.1561/1100000018 

Jennifer Fereday and Eimear Muir-Cochrane. 2006. 
Demonstrating Rigor Using Thematic Analysis: A 
Hybrid Approach of Inductive and Deductive 
Coding and Theme Development. International 
Journal of Qualitative Methods 5, 1: 80–92. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/160940690600500107 

Chris Feudtner, Ross M Hays, Gerri Haynes, J 
Russell Geyer, John M Neff, and Thomas D 
Koepsell. 2001. Deaths attributed to pediatric 
complex chronic conditions: national trends and 
implications for supportive care services. Pediatrics 
107, 6: e99–e99. 

Andrea L Hartzler, Jason P Izard, Bruce L Dalkin, 
Sean P Mikles, and John L Gore. 2015. Design and 
feasibility of integrating personalized PRO 
dashboards into prostate cancer care. Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association: ocv101. 

Kimberly Hieftje, Lindsay R Duncan, and Lynn E 
Fiellin. 2014. Novel methods to collect meaningful 
data from adolescents for the development of health 
interventions. Health promotion practice 15, 5: 
714–22. http://doi.org/10.1177/1524839914521211 

Alexis Hiniker, Kiley Sobel, and Bongshin Lee. 
2017. Co-Designing with Preschoolers Using 
Fictional Inquiry and Comicboarding. Proceedings 
of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems  - CHI ’17, ACM Press, 5767–
5772. http://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025588 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 476Page 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19.  Matthew K Hong, Lauren Wilcox, Daniel Machado, 
Thomas A Olson, and Stephen F Simoneaux. 2016. 
Care Partnerships: Toward Technology to Support 
Teens’ Participation in Their Health Care. 
Proceedings of the 34th annual ACM Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 
http://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2858036.28
58508 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 

24. 

25. 

26. 

Hilary Hutchinson, Heiko Hansen, Nicolas Roussel, 
et al. 2003. Technology probes: inspiring design for 
and with families. Proceedings of the conference on 
Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’03, 
ACM Press, 17. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/642611.642616 

Catherine E. Jansen, Christine Miaskowski, 
Marylin Dodd, Glenna Dowling, and Joel Kramer. 
2005. A metaanalysis of studies of the effects of 
cancer chemotherapy on various domains of 
cognitive function. Cancer 104, 10: 2222–2233. 
http://doi.org/10.1002/cncr.21469 

Sidney Katz, Amasa B Ford, Roland W Moskowitz, 
Beverly A Jackson, and Marjorie W Jaffe. 1963. 
Studies of illness in the aged: the index of ADL: a 
standardized measure of biological and 
psychosocial function. Jama 185, 12: 914–919. 

Yoojung Kim, Eunyoung Heo, Hyunjeong Lee, et 
al. 2017. Prescribing 10,000 Steps Like Aspirin: 
Designing a Novel Interface for Data-Driven 
Medical Consultations. Proceedings of the 2017 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems  - CHI ’17, ACM Press, 5787–5799. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025570 

Predrag Klasnja, Andrea Civan Hartzler, Kent T 
Unruh, and Wanda Pratt. 2010. Blowing in the 
wind: unanchored patient information work during 
cancer care. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 193–
202. 

Kristine L. Kwekkeboom. 2016. Cancer Symptom 
Cluster Management. Seminars in Oncology 
Nursing 32, 4: 373–382. 
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.soncn.2016.08.004 

Charlotte P. Lee. 2007. Boundary Negotiating 
Artifacts: Unbinding the Routine of Boundary 
Objects and Embracing Chaos in Collaborative 
Work. Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
(CSCW) 16, 3: 307–339. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s10606-007-9044-5 

27.  Matthew L. Lee and Anind K. Dey. 2015. Sensor-

based observations of daily living for aging in 
place. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing 19, 1: 
27–43. http://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-014-0810-3 

28. 

Susanne Lindberg and Susanne. 2013. Participatory 
design workshops with children with cancer. 

29. 

30. 

31. 

32. 

33. 

34. 

35. 

Proceedings of the 12th International Conference 
on Interaction Design and Children - IDC ’13, 
ACM Press, 332–335. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2485760.2485840 

Louis S. Matza, Donald L. Patrick, Anne W. Riley, 
et al. 2013. Pediatric Patient-Reported Outcome 
Instruments for Research to Support Medical 
Product Labeling: Report of the ISPOR PRO Good 
Research Practices for the Assessment of Children 
and Adolescents Task Force. Value in Health 16, 4: 
461–479. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.jval.2013.04.004 

Gillian M. McCarthy, Edgar R. Rodriguez Ramírez, 
and Brian J. Robinson. 2017. Participatory Design 
to Address Stigma with Adolescents with Type 1 
Diabetes. Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on 
Designing Interactive Systems  - DIS ’17, ACM 
Press, 83–94. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/3064663.3064740 

Helena M. Mentis, Anita Komlodi, Katrina 
Schrader, et al. 2017. Crafting a View of Self-
Tracking Data in the Clinical Visit. Proceedings of 
the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems  - CHI ’17, ACM Press, 5800–
5812. http://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025589 

Neema Moraveji, Jason Li, Jiarong Ding, Patrick 
O’Kelley, and Suze Woolf. 2007. Comicboarding: 
using comics as proxies for participatory design 
with children. Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
conference on Human factors in computing systems 
- CHI ’07, ACM Press, 1371. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1240624.1240832 

Rupa A Patel, Predrag Klasnja, Andrea Hartzler, 
Kenton T Unruh, and Wanda Pratt. 2012. Probing 
the benefits of real-time tracking during cancer 
care. AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings, 
American Medical Informatics Association, 1340. 

Laura R. Pina, Sang-Wha Sien, Teresa Ward, et al. 
2017. From Personal Informatics to Family 
Informatics: Understanding Family Practices 
around Health Monitoring. Proceedings of the 2017 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work and Social Computing - CSCW 
’17, ACM Press, 2300–2315. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998362 

Erika S. Poole and Tamara Peyton. 2013. 
Interaction design research with adolescents. 
Proceedings of the 12th International Conference 
on Interaction Design and Children - IDC ’13, 
ACM Press, 211–217. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2485760.2485766 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 476Page 12 
 
 
36. 

Jessica Schroeder, Jane Hoffswell, Chia-Fang 
Chung, James Fogarty, Sean Munson, and Jasmine 
Zia. 2017. Supporting Patient-Provider 
Collaboration to Identify Individual Triggers using 
Food and Symptom Journals. Proceedings of the 
2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work and Social Computing  - CSCW 
’17, ACM Press, 1726–1739. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998276 

37.  Michael Shapiro, Douglas Johnston, Jonathan 

Wald, and Donald Mon. 2012. Patient-Generated 
Health Data White Paper: White Paper Prepared 
for the Office of the National Coordinator for 
Health it by RTI International. Retrieved June 29, 
2017 from 
http://www.rti.org/pubs/patientgeneratedhealthdata.
pdf 

AnneLoes Van Staa, Susan Jedeloo, Jos M Latour, 
and Margo J Trappenburg. 2010. Exciting but 
exhausting: experiences with participatory research 
with chronically ill adolescents. Health 
Expectations 13, 1: 95–107. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1369-7625.2009.00574.x 

38. 

39. 

40. 

41. 

42. 

S. L. Star and J. R. Griesemer. 1989. Institutional 
Ecology, `Translations’ and Boundary Objects: 
Amateurs and Professionals in Berkeley’s Museum 
of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39. Social Studies of 
Science 19, 3: 387–420. 
http://doi.org/10.1177/030631289019003001 

James W Varni, Michael Seid, and Paul S Kurtin. 
2001. PedsQLTM 4.0: Reliability and validity of the 
Pediatric Quality of Life InventoryTM Version 4.0 
Generic Core Scales in healthy and patient 
populations. Medical care 39, 8: 800–812. 

Peter West, Max Van Kleek, Richard Giordano, 
Mark Weal, and Nigel Shadbolt. 2017. Information 
Quality Challenges of Patient-Generated Data in 
Clinical Practice. Frontiers in public health 5: 284. 
http://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2017.00284 

Jason C Yip, Elizabeth Foss, and Mona Leigh 
Guha. 2012. Co-designing with adolescents. 
Designing Interactive Technology for Teens 
Workshop, NordiCHI, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Retrieved from: http://www. chici. 
org/ditt2012/papers. html. 

CHI 2018 Paper CHI 2018, April 21–26, 2018, Montréal, QC, CanadaPaper 476Page 13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
