“We’ve Bin Watching You” – Designing for Reflection and 
Social Persuasion to Promote Sustainable Lifestyles 

1Culture Lab, School of 
Computing Science

Anja Thieme1, Rob Comber1, Julia Miebach2, Jack Weeden1, Nicole Krämer2, Shaun Lawson3 and 
Patrick Olivier1 
2Social Psychology: Media and 
Communication, University of 
Duisburg-Essen, GER 
{julia.miebach@stud./ 
nicole.kraemer@}uni-due.de 

3Lincoln Social Computing 
Research Centre (LiSC) 
University of Lincoln, UK 
 slawson@lincoln.ac.uk 

{anja.thieme/robert.comber/jack
.weeden/p.l.olivier}@ncl.ac.uk 

University, UK

Newcastle

ABSTRACT 
BinCam is a social persuasive system to motivate reflection 
and  behavioral  change  in  the  food  waste  and  recycling 
habits  of  young  adults.  The  system  replaces  an  existing 
kitchen refuse bin and automatically logs disposed of items 
through digital images captured by a smart phone installed 
on  the  underside  of  the  bin  lid.  Captured  images  are 
uploaded to a BinCam application on Facebook where they 
can  be  explored  by  all  users  of  the  BinCam  system. 
Engagement  with  BinCam  is  designed  to  fit  into  the 
existing structure of users’ everyday life, with the intention 
that  reflection  on  waste  and  recycling  becomes  a  playful 
and shared group activity. Results of a user study reveal an 
increase  in  both  users’  awareness  of,  and  reflection  about, 
their  waste  management  and  their  motivation  to  improve 
their  waste-related  skills.  With  BinCam,  we  also  explore 
informational and normative social influences as a source of 
change  (e.g.,  socially  evoked  feelings  of  ‘guilt’  for  non-
recycling  or  food  disposal),  which  has  to  date  been 
underexplored  in  persuasive  HCI.  Design  implications  for 
reflection and social persuasion are proposed. 

Author Keywords 
Persuasive; 
behavioral change; social networks; sustainable HCI. 

technology;  social  persuasion; 

reflection; 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m [Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI)]: 
Miscellaneous; 

General Terms 
Design, Human Factors. 

INTRODUCTION  
Recently,  significant  research  has  been  carried  out  in  HCI 
into the potential of technology to change people’s beliefs, 
to shape their attitudes, and to influence their behavior [12]. 
Persuasive  technologies  [11]  are  now  applied  in  many 

Permission  to  make  digital  or  hard  copies  of  all  or  part  of  this  work  for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, 
or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists,  requires  prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. 
CHI’12, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA. 
Copyright 2012 ACM 978-1-4503-1015-4/12/05...$10.00. 

domains,  including  healthcare  (e.g.,  motivating  users  to 
exercise,  to  make  healthier  food  choices  or  monitor  their 
mood  states  [22]),  education  and  training  [12],  and 
environmental  sustainability  where  it  has  been  used  for 
instance to promote reductions in energy consumption [17] 
and greener transportation habits [14].   

This  paper  aims  to  contribute  to  an  understanding  of  how 
technology  can  promote  ecological  awareness  and 
environmentally  sustainable  lifestyles  in  individuals  [7]. 
Numerous  previous  approaches  collect  information  about 
an  individual’s  behavior  and  present  it  back  to  the 
individual to increase their awareness and understanding of 
such  behavior  and 
through 
processes of self-reflection [1,8,18]. Such approaches often 
seek to foster a ‘personal morality’ and consider individuals 
as  responsible  actors  who  make  rational  decisions  when 
they  can  draw  on  accurate  information  about  themselves. 
Typically  they  ignore  possible  restrictions  in  a  person’s 
abilities and opportunities to choose freely as well as other 
costs for change [e.g.,7,8,22,27].  

its  environmental  impact 

In  practice,  self-reflection  is  a  non-trivial  activity  that 
requires both considerable effort on the part of the user and 
an  interest  in  the  particular  behavior  or  topic  [cf18]. 
Engaging  individuals  to  reflect  on  information  that  might 
not  be  of  general  interest  to  them,  such  as  waste  disposal, 
the  use  of  effective  motivational  strategies. 
requires 
Furthermore,  HCI  research  and  design  on  behavioral 
change largely focuses on motivating the lone individual [8] 
and  has  paid  little  regard  to  powerful  social  persuasive 
strategies  [11],  such  as  informational  and  normative  social 
influence.  Likewise,  the  use  and  study  of  social  media  to 
motivate change is still relatively underexplored [13,21]. 

BinCam  explores  these  issues  through  a  social  persuasive 
system that provides users with a display of pictures of their 
own, and others’, refuse bin contents on the social network 
site  Facebook  to  passively  invite  reflections  on  their  own, 
as  well  as  other  peoples’  recycling  and  food  waste 
behaviors.  Facebook  has 
support 
engagement  with  BinCam,  but  can  also  be  leveraged  to 
realize  various  forms  of  social  influence  to  motivate 
change.  Since  the  management  of  waste  is  often  a  shared 

the  potential 

to 

Session: Defying Environmental Behavior ChangesCHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA2337 
 
 
 
 
effort  between  several  members  of  a  household,  we 
embedded a BinCam bin in the kitchen of 4 households of 
5-7  people  living  together.  Placing  the  system  within  the 
existing  social  structure  of  the  household  extends  our 
understanding  of  behavior  and  behavior  change  beyond 
aspects  of  ‘personal  morality’.  In  addition,  the  collective 
use  of BinCam  can  foster a sense of  group  membership in 
each household to facilitate processes of social persuasion.  

Although  we  address  with  BinCam  environmental  issues 
related to recycling and food waste, the  present  work does 
not  research  sustainability  per  se  but  instead  uses  it  as  an 
application area to explore strategies borrowed from social 
psychology  to  facilitate  reflection  and  behavioral  change 
through  digital  design  [4,11].  As  such,  our  account  of  the 
design and evaluation of BinCam reveals: (1) a new way of 
engaging 
their  waste 
management  behaviors;  (2)  the  potential  for  employing 
strategies  of  social  persuasion  –  using  the  social  network 
site  Facebook  –  to  motivate  and  improve  environmentally 
friendly  behaviors;  and  (3)  how  a  close  incorporation  of 
such  a  system  within  individuals’  everyday  lives  may 
support  engagement  with,  and  adherence  to,  interactive 
systems designed to promote behavior change. 

reflections  on 

individuals 

in 

PERSUADING CHANGE IN BEHAVIORS 
Persuasion  is  the  purposeful  attempt  to  change  a  person’s 
attitude  or  behavior  [12].  To  this  end,  the  Theory  of 
Planned  Behavior  (TPB)  [2]  provides  a  useful  conceptual 
framework by  which  we can  explain and predict behavior. 
It  has  previously  been  applied  to  the  study  of  recycling 
behaviors and is well supported by empirical evidence [16]. 

three  conceptually 
toward 

Determinants of Human Behavior  
The  TPB  (see  Figure  1)  identifies  a  person’s  behavior  as 
having 
independent  determinants: 
attitude 
the  behavior,  subjective  norms  and 
perceived  behavioral  control.  Attitudes  are  informed  by  a 
person’s  expectations  of  a  favorable  behavioral  outcome 
and  the  values  attached  to  this  outcome  (e.g.  important 
contribution to the environment). Subjective norms relate to 
the  degree  to  which  a  person  perceives  social  pressure  to 
perform  the  behavior,  including  normative  beliefs  about 
what important others expect of the person (e.g. would they 
approve the behavior), and a person’s motivation to comply 
with  these  expectations  [2,20,24].  The  third  component, 
perceived  behavioral  control,  refers  to  whether  or  not  a 
person feels able to perform the behavior; for instance if the 
resources  (e.g.  recycling  facilities),  opportunities  or  skills 
required for a particular action are available [20].  

Attitude toward 
the behavior 

Subjective norm 

Intention 

Behavior 

Perceived 
behavioral 
control 

Figure 1. The Theory of Planned Behavior [2]. 

All three components contribute to the behavioral intentions 
that  inform  later  actions.  The  greater  the  intention  and  the 
perceived ability to engage in the behavior, the more likely 
it will be performed [2,12]. To date, a person’s attitudes, as 
opposed  to  subjective  norms,  have  often  been  found  to 
more  strongly  predict  intentions.  Research  by  Ybarra  and 
Trafimow  [30]  however,  shows  that  increasing  a  person’s 
sense  of  group  membership,  rather  than  attitude,  leads  to 
higher  correlations  between  social  norms  and  behavioral 
intentions. Even though, the relative importance of the three 
determinants  of  intention  can  vary  across  situations  and 
behaviors [2,20] each needs to be supported to increase the 
target behavior. 

It 

regards 

Strategies for Behavioral Change 
While  valuable  in  identifying  the  determining  factors  of 
human  behavior,  the  TPB  does  not  address  important 
procedural  aspects  of  performing  a  specific  behavior. 
Prochaska  et  al.’s  [24]  transtheoretical  model  (TTM) 
provides stage-based strategies to support the individual in 
gradually  achieving  change. 
intentional 
behavioral  change  as  a  process  encompassing  five  stages: 
precontemplation,  contemplation,  preparation,  action  and 
maintenance. In precontemplation, individuals are unaware 
or  under-aware  that  a  particular  behavior  needs  changing 
and  often  only  modify  their  behavior  because  they  are 
pressured  by  others.  During  contemplation,  people  are 
aware  and  seriously  consider  changing  their  behavior  but 
are not yet ready to commit to it. The  preparation stage is 
characterised  by  the  intention  to  change  and  making  the 
first  small  changes.  The  actual  behavior  modification 
occurs  during  the  action  stage  and  is  maintained  if  the 
change is sustained.  

Our  research  targets  young  people  between  the  age  of  18-
35,  who  were  identified  by  [28]  to  be  either  recycling 
unaware  or  are  not  seriously  contemplating  becoming 
active in this regard. Early stages of change require specific 
promotion strategies not only to overcome common barriers 
to change, such as reluctance or inadequate motivation, but 
also  to  raise  a  person’s  awareness  about  themselves  and 
their  behaviors,  and  increase  the  possibility  to  experience 
positive  emotions  related  to  a  target  behavior.  These 
strategies allow  for a  re-evaluation of a person’s cognitive 
and affective values towards a behavior, which can promote 
intrinsic motivation and facilitate change [20,24].  

Social Persuasion and Behavioral Motivation 
While  the  suggested  strategies  for  behavioral  change 
meaningfully inform persuasive designs, it has to be kept in 
mind that the TTM presents an ideal. Individuals may find 
themselves  in  various  stages  of  change  at  different  times 
and  may  not  proceed  continuously  from  one  stage  to  the 
next  [1].  Further,  the  TTM  is  aligned  to  individual 
processes  of  behavioral  change,  in  which  social  processes 
to  support  change  are  interwoven.  Thus,  the  next  sections 
expand  on  how  behavior  can  be  regulated  through  social 
influence and other forms of behavioral motivation.  

Session: Defying Environmental Behavior ChangesCHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA2338 
 
 
 
that  a  person’s 

Considering 
thoughts  and 
behaviors are influenced by the presence of others, Deutsch 
and  Gerard  [6]  distinguish  two  forms  of  social  influence: 
informational and normative. 

feelings, 

Informational Social Influence  
Other people can serve as a valuable source of information 
to  accurately  evaluate  one’s  behavior.  This  is  particularly 
relevant in situations where people are uncertain about how 
to  behave.  To  overcome  the  natural  need  for  information, 
they communicate with others, but also tend to observe and 
copy the actual behavior of others [4]. Resulting changes in 
a  person’s  attitudes  or  behaviors  can  be  deep-seated, 
private  and  enduring  [6],  as  they  are  motivated  by  the 
desire to behave appropriately in the target situation.   

Normative Social Influence  
Human  beings  also  have  a  fundamental  need  to  belong  to 
others  [10].  Thus,  in  order  to  develop  and  preserve 
meaningful relationships and to be socially accepted, people 
have a tendency to agree on the values, beliefs, attitudes or 
behaviors  of  others  [4].  The  normative  social  influence 
arising  from  conforming  to  positive  expectations  of  others 
is  stronger  the  more  important  these  people  are  to  the  self 
(e.g.,  friends,  family)  [6].  Changes  in  the  expressions  of 
attitudes  or  behaviors  as  a  result  of  obeying  to  normative 
influences,  however,  do  not  necessarily  reflect  an  internal 
change, but instead can be superficial, only publicly shown 
and transitory. They are motivated by the person’s desire to 
obtain social approval and avoid social rejection by others, 
and usually persist only while the person is under a certain 
level of social surveillance. 

Behavioral Motivation 
People  generally  engage  in  behaviors  that  are  either 
intrinsically  rewarding  (e.g.  satisfaction  about  contributing 
to  the  environment)  or  extrinsically  rewarding  (e.g.  a 
reduced bill on waste), but also tailor their actions towards 
avoiding  adverse  experiences  such  as  feelings  of  guilt  or 
shame  [10].  While  strategies  for  rewarding  desirable 
behaviors  are  often  applied  in  persuasive  computing 
systems,  strategies  of  aversion  or  punishment  are  typically 
criticized  as  being  inappropriate,  not  only  for  ethical 
reasons  [11,12],  but  also  because  users  are  assumed  to 
simply stop using a system if they are nagged or blamed by 
it  [cf.,5].  Foster  et  al.  [13]  however,  have  shown  that 
aversive feedback, if carefully and playfully presented, does 
not necessarily disengage users, but functions as a valuable 
tool for behavioral change. 

Related Work  
To  date,  a  number  of  designs  have  been  proposed  which 
address  people’s  waste  management  and  sustainability 
behavior.  Gartland  and  Piasek  [15]  describe  with  their 
Weigh Your Waste system, an interactive disposal bin with 
an integrated scale to weigh the amount of waste produced 
by  a  household.  Both  the  weight  of  the  waste  and  its 
financial cost are then displayed on a touch screen, together 
with  further  information  on  how  general  waste  can  be 

reduced. It was hoped that visualizing the financial benefits 
of  producing  less  waste  would  motivate  environmentally 
friendlier actions. Although a promising design concept, its 
impact on people’s behavior has not been evaluated. 

to 

is  not  designed 

Jetsam [23] is a public city trashcan, augmented to project a 
visualization  of  collected  trash  items  to  urban  dwellers  on 
the  street.  The  system 
raise 
environmental  awareness,  but  to  prompt  personal  and 
collective sense of wonder as to aspects of urban life and to 
provoke storytelling around the visualized trash. The idea to 
stimulate  reflection  on  both  the  personal  and  communal 
level  also  informed  the  design  of  the  Cleanly  system  [25] 
which focused on educating citizens to avoid environmental 
pollution  through  misplaced  trash.  For  this  purpose,  it 
interactions  with  various  bins  and 
tracked  people’s 
displayed  these  on  wearable  smiley  badges,  in  monthly 
personal reports and on public displays.  Even though both 
Jetsam  and  Cleanly  consider  that  the  community  and  the 
they  do  not 
individual 
explicitly  consider  the  community  as  a  source  for  social 
influence.  They  also  have  not  been  evaluated  in  terms  of 
their impact on people’s pro-environmental behavior. 

inform  a  person’s  behavior, 

THE DESIGN OF BINCAM  
BinCam  is  a  two-part  system  consisting  of  a  BinCam  bin 
and  a  custom  BinCam  application  (short  ‘App’)  on 
Facebook.  Based  on  theories  of  behavioral  change,  the 
system is designed to provide users with the opportunity to 
evaluate  their  own,  as  well  as  other  people’s,  bin  related 
behavior  through  information  contained  in  the  pictures 
taken from a household’s rubbish bin. The BinCam system 
facilitates  normative  social  influence  on  three  levels:  (i) 
within  households;  (ii)  between  BinCam  households;  and 
(iii)  amongst  a  potentially  wider  circle  of  friends  on 
Facebook.  The  strategies  that  aim  to  motivate  and  engage 
users with the system are introduced below.  

The BinCam Bin 
Information  about  one’s  own  waste  activities  are  of  little 
interest  to  most  people,  in  particular  young  adults  [cf.,28], 
and  this  poses  a  significant  design  challenge  for  the 
collection  of  waste  related  data  [cf.,18,24]. To  address  the 
lack  of  motivation,  and  the  time  required,  to  gather 
information on the users’ part, the process of data collection 
in  BinCam  is  entirely  automated.  In  addition,  seeking  to 
design  BinCam  as  a  minimal  intervention  and  considering 
that  recycling  facilities  in  UK  households  range  from 
having at least one and up to five recycling containers,  we 
found the refuse bin to be the only standard amongst all. It 
provides  rich  data  about  individuals’  waste  behavior,  as  it 
generally  captures  landfill  waste,  food  waste  as  well  as 
misplaced  recyclables.  Thus,  the  BinCam  bin  simply 
replaces  an  existing  kitchen  refuse  bin  and  automatically 
captures  thrown  away  items  through  digital  images  taken 
with  a  smart  phone  installed  on  the  underside  of  the  bin’s 
lid  (see  Figure  2).  The  phone’s  accelerometer  senses 
movement of the lid and triggers the  camera each time the 

Session: Defying Environmental Behavior ChangesCHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA2339lid  is  opened  and  then  closed.  Using  either  a  3G  or  Wi-Fi 
connection,  the  phone  uploads  captured  images  to  the 
BinCam  application  on  Facebook  where 
they  are 
immediately  visible  to  all  BinCam  members.  This  system-
driven  capture  of 
individuals’  waste-related  behavior 
significantly  eases  the  collection  of  personal  data  [18] 
compared to existing methods such as ‘waste diaries’ [19].  

The BinCam Application on Facebook 
There  are  several  motivations  for  using  Facebook  as 
BinCam’s  platform  for  reflection  on  personal,  as  well  as 
other  people’s,  behavior.  Facebook  is  easy  to  access,  self-
instructing and widely used and accepted by our target user 
group.  It  provides  a  well-established  social  network 
structure  which  enables  not  only  the  formation  and 
preservation  of  connections  to  relevant  others  but  also 
leverages  individuals’  strong  self-interest  to  be  socially 
accepted  [10].  By  embedding  the  BinCam  application 
within  Facebook,  we  aim  to  engage  individuals  in  regular 
use  of  the  system,  but  also  to  promote  behavioral  change 
through  the  social  dynamics  within  the  network  itself.  To 
foster  day-to-day  engagement  and 
to  enable  social 
informational  and  normative  influences,  the  BinCam  App 
includes  functionality,  which  we  termed  ‘BinPictures’  and 
the ‘BinLeague’. 

Figure 2. A BinCam bin augmented with a Sony Ericson 
XperiaTM X10 mini smart phone. 

Figure 3. Part of the BinCam interface showing images of the 
bin responsibilities and bin spies to the left, and an enlarged 
and tagged bin picture in the middle, with a message of 
participants written on a banana skin. 

BinPictures 
On Facebook, pictures  from the  BinCam  bin are  presented 
as  a  continuous  stream  of  photos  which  can  each  be 
enlarged to furnish a better view of individual items in the 
bin  (see  Figure  3).  The  interface  also  displays  the  owners 
that  are  responsible  for  the  bin  and  its  contents  (‘Bin 
Responsibilities’)  as  well  as  other  people  who  recently 
viewed the pictures (‘Bin Spy’). As new pictures are added 
to  the  photo  stream,  they  are  simultaneously  sent  to 
Amazon’s Mechanical Turk crowd-sourcing service (AMT, 
www.mturk.com),  an  online  labor  market  where  ‘workers’ 
are  paid  small  amounts  of  money  to  complete  micro  tasks 
(in  our  case  $0.02  per  image).  These  ‘tasks’  are  created 
automatically for each bin picture and require workers, who 
are given clear instructions, to  identify the total number of 
items,  the  number  of  recyclable  items  and  the  number  of 
food  items  in  each  photo.  Particularly  the  measurement  of 
food waste is a novel aspect that none of the previous work 
touched upon, and which is considerably difficult, i.e. when 
compared  to  measures  of  energy  consumption.  Thus,  the 
crowd  sourcing  technique  endeavored  to  help  detect  and 
distinguish recyclable, non-recyclable and food waste items 
in  the  pictures,  if  even  squashed  or  semi-covered  –  a 
for  an  automatic 
too  complex 
problem  considered 
computer-vision  based  solution.  Once  tagged  by 
the 
workers,  the  resulting  data  is  presented  alongside  the 
respective picture. Bin owners can manually edit the tags if 
items are incorrectly identified, and they can delete photos. 

As  suggested  by  the  TTM  [24],  the  display  of  the 
BinPictures  aims  to  increase  awareness  of  an  individual’s 
waste  management.  To  further  facilitate  normative  social 
influences,  the  pictures  taken  by  each  BinCam  bin  are  not 
only  visible  to  all  members  of  one  household,  but  to  all 
BinCam  users.  Although  access  to  the  App  is  provided  to 
BinCam  users  only,  they  can  share  BinPictures  with  their 
wider circle of friends by  linking selected pictures to their 
own  Facebook  profile.  Inevitably,  the  display  of  such 
personal  data  on  a  public  platform  like  Facebook  raises 
privacy  and  ethics  issues.  Disposed  of  items  are  normally 
objects  that  individuals  do  not  want  to  be  identified  with 
anymore, and the publication of these pictures poses a risk 
to  the  individual  of  being  publicly  humiliated.  This  risk, 
however, is ameliorated by the deployment of BinCam only 
in  shared  houses,  in  that  the  contents  of  a  bin  cannot  be 
directly  attributed  to  any  particular  individual.  However, 
such  decisions  are  part  of  a  design  trade-off,  as  this 
aggregation  itself  also  makes  the  impact  of  individual’s 
behavior  less  visible  and  as  a  consequence  may  lead  to  a 
reduction in the social influence effects described earlier. 

BinLeague 
The  numeric  values  generated  by  AMT  contribute  to 
weekly  calculations  of 
league 
visualizes  two  scores  for  each  bin:  (i)  for  recycling 
achievements  visualized  as  ‘leaves  on  a  tree’;  and  (ii)  for 
preventing food waste displayed as ‘gold bars’. A decrease 
of recyclable materials in the bin leads to a growth of leaves 

the  BinLeague.  This 

Session: Defying Environmental Behavior ChangesCHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA2340 
 
on  the  tree,  and  a  reduction  of  food  waste  increases  a 
household’s  amount  of  gold.  Each  household  starts  at  a 
baseline  of  5  leaves  and  5  gold  bars  (of  a  range  of  0-10). 
From  one  week  to  the  next,  the  percentage  change  is 
calculated and visualized for each household (see Figure 4). 
The tree and gold images draw on common metaphors used 
[cf.,17]  and  were  chosen  as 
in  eco-visualizations 
abstractions of each household’s performance on recycling 
and  food  waste  behaviors.  They  may  also  compensate  for 
what  Dourish  [8]  outlines  as  the  problem  of  scalability,  in 
that the consequences of an individual’s contribution to the 
overall environment are difficult to visualize.  

The  BinLeague  aims  to  motivate  competition  between  the 
BinCam  households  to  support  behavioral  change.  On  the 
one  hand,  supporting  one’s  housemates  and  one’s 
household achievements makes normative social influences 
more  salient,  while  a  comparison  of  own  efforts  with  the 
progress of other households presents a social informational 
influence  [4,6].  On  the  other  hand,  the  element  of 
competition  can  foster  desirable  behaviors  in  providing  a 
positive outlook on winning, described by [2, p.184] as the 
“incentive value of success”, but also motivates individuals 
not to lose, and thus, to avoid feelings of failure [10].   

EVALUATION OF BINCAM  
In order to understand their potential and effectiveness, HCI 
research  on  sustainability  [e.g.,8,27]  emphasizes 
the 
importance  of  designing  technologies  to  be  used  and 
studied  in  everyday  life.  Thus,  to  gain  insight  into  how 
individuals  interpret  the  BinCam  system  and  how  they 
relate  to  its  different  features,  we  conducted  a  case  study 
with  young  adults  (18-35  years),  living  together  in  shared 
households  (5-7  occupants).  To  facilitate  engagement  with 
the BinCam App, participants were also required to have a 
Facebook account, which they access and use regularly.  

Method 
22 participants over the age of 18 were recruited (age  M = 
23,  SD  =  4.6,  females  =  11)  through  posters,  flyers  and 
personal contacts of a  member of the research team. In all 
but one of the  four chosen  households,  gender  was  mixed. 
Of  our  participants,  16  were  students  and  6  were  self-
employed or unemployed.  

Assessing  their  recycling  facilities  in  an  initial  visit,  we 
found that all households had a recycling bin for cardboard, 
plastic and metal, 3 of them had an additional recycling bin 
for glass and 1 had an extra bin for compost. Refuse waste 
for  each  household  is  collected  weekly  and  recycling 
biweekly.  In  a  second  visit  two  weeks  later,  we  replaced 
their existing kitchen bin with the BinCam bin, handed out 
questionnaires and provided participants with the URL link 
to the BinCam App. Their engagement with the App during 
the  five-week  period  of  the  study  however  was  voluntary. 
To facilitate appropriation of the BinCam bin and to foster 
collaboration  between  members  of  each  household, 
participants  were  asked  to  name  their  bin.  The  households 
did not know each other from the outset of the study. 

Figure 4. The BinLeague displaying all households’ recycling 
achievements (leaves on a tree) and food waste savings (gold 
bars) in comparison to other households and over time. 

In  a  pre-questionnaire,  participants  were  asked  about  their 
general  Facebook  use  habits  by  answering  the  Facebook 
Intensity Scale created by Ellison et al. [9]. Results revealed 
a strong use of the social network site. Participants had on 
average 372 friends (SD = 251.4) and spent on average 86 
min on the website per day. As part of the self-report data, 
participants  further  indicated  that  Facebook  had  become 
part  of  their  daily  routine,  that  they  used  the  platform  to 
learn about others, to stay in  touch  with people  they know 
or  met  socially  and  that  they  would  be  sorry  if  Facebook 
closed down.  

Before  the  start  of  the  BinCam  deployments,  participants 
were  also  asked  about  their  general  attitude  and  behavior 
related  to  recycling  and  food  waste.  Question  items  were 
informed by [29]. In contrast to [28] which identified young 
adults as recycling unaware, our participants indicated on a 
5-point  scale  ranging  from  0  (not  at  all  important)  to  4 
(very  important)  that  recycling  is  quite  important  to  them 
with  M  =  3  (SD  =.8)  and  that  they  are  fairly  concerned 
when they have to throw away food (M = 3, SD = .8). These 
more  global  statements  were  supplemented  by  a  36-item 
pre- and post- study questionnaire on participants’ recycling 
and  food  waste  attitudes  and  behaviors.  Findings  of  this 
quantitative  data,  however,  did  not  reveal  significant 
changes over time and therefore are not presented.  

At  the  end  of  the  five-week  study,  we  arranged  focus 
groups  with  participants  in  their  residences,  lasting  on 
average  51  min  (min  =  40,  max  =  77).  We  chose  this 
method  to  capture  rich  and  insightful  data  evolving  from 
interactive  group  discussions  about  their  experiences  of 
BinCam.  We  found  post-study  focus  groups  to  be  less 
intrusive  than  regular  observations  or  diary  keeping,  while 
very suitable  for our research purpose to study BinCam  in 
shared  households  of  individuals’  living  and  experiencing 
the  system  together.  Focus  group  sessions  were  audio 
recorded, transcribed and analyzed in-depth using thematic 
analysis  [3].  Although  participation  was  voluntary,  each 
participant  was  remunerated  for  filling  out  questionnaires 
and taking part in the focus group with £10. The study was 
approved by the institutional ethics committee at Newcastle 
University. All names of participants have been changed.  

Session: Defying Environmental Behavior ChangesCHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA2341 
Results of the Focus Groups  
Overall, participants liked the BinCam system, appraised  it 
as  a  good  idea  and  would  recommend  it  to  friends.  The 
system  was  described  as  a  useful  way  to  raise  an 
individual’s  reflection  on  waste  management  while  being 
experienced  as  fun;  turning  recycling  into  a  more  exciting 
activity than it usually is. Yet, three participants stated that 
they dislike the idea to be monitored in every aspect of their 
life and although they generally  did not mind if somebody 
saw pictures of their waste, they wouldn’t want the council 
to  see  them.  These  privacy  concerns,  however,  were  not 
associated with their temporary participation in the BinCam 
project, which was both self-chosen and liked.  

Integration of BinCam in Everyday Life 
All participants appreciated that using the BinCam bin was 
effortless and that they didn’t have to change their routine. 
They  felt  that  the  bin  was  well  integrated  into  their 
everyday life. The majority of our BinCam users were also 
very  committed  to  Facebook  and  valued  the  incorporation 
of  BinPictures  on 
this  website.  In  one  household, 
participants described themselves as less engaged Facebook 
users and were critical of a number of qualities of Facebook 
itself,  describing  the  platform  as  an  ugly  website  that  is 
boring, uncreative and user unfriendly. These criticisms are 
also applied to the BinCam App. Although they proposed to 
replace  the  App  with  an  external  webpage  they  admitted 
that they then “might have never looked at it” (Jill). 

Exploration of Own and Other Household’s BinPictures 
Despite  reporting  that  the  App  was  well-integrated  into 
existing  routines,  participants  only  looked  at  the  pictures 
taken of their own bin a few times (log file: min = 0, max = 
27,  M  =  3.2)  and  mainly  at  the  start  of  the  study.  At  that 
time,  curiosity  about  BinCam  was  highest  and  participants 
were motivated to identify items disposed of by themselves 
and  their  housemates.  Jill  states  for  instance:  “Oh  well,  I 
tried to find things I’ve thrown away. I was like ‘Where is 
that  item’”,  and  as  Anna  describes:  “You  could  identify 
different food packages belonging to a different member in 
the household.” Yet, after the first two  weeks, participants 
either forgot about the BinCam App or simply lost interest 
in  using  it.  Jim  explains:  “I  guess  it’s  still  important  but  I 
mean I kind of get bored looking at rubbish after a while”. 
Although  participants  admitted  to  have  been  a  little  nosy, 
and curious about exploring other households’ BinPictures, 
this voyeuristic opportunity was hardly ever taken (log file: 
max = 6). Participants stated that pictures of other people’s 
rubbish  were  not  of  much  interest  to  them  and  focused 
mainly on those activities of their own bin and household. 

The BinLeague and the Element of Competition 
Participants’  opinions  on  the  BinLeague  were  mixed.  On 
the  one  hand,  the  league  with  its  ‘tree’  and  ‘gold  bar’ 
graphics was described as a nice and easy visualization for 
tracking  a  household’s  progress  in  recycling  and  money 
savings on food waste. On the other hand, the uncertainty as 
to  how  the  league  positions  were  calculated  and  how 
changes  could  be  achieved  led  to  confusion  among 

participants. This was in part due to the fact that we found 
the tags delivered through AMT to be largely incorrect. Of 
a  random  picture  sample  of  20,  only  5  images  were 
correctly  tagged.  Participants  also  expressed  the  wish  to 
receive  feedback  more  frequently,  or  immediately,  when 
they dispose of items. Similarly mixed were also the results 
for  the  element  of  competition  stimulated  through  the 
BinLeague.  While  some  participants  indeed  compared 
league  achievements  with  other  households  and  felt 
empowered  and  encouraged  to  improve,  others  were  less 
keen  on  the  competition.  Sara  explains:  “The  competition 
sounds  interesting  in  theory  but  I  don’t  know,  that’s  a 
competition on Facebook, and I don’t think I ever really got 
into it. I wouldn’t particularly try and get a bin award.”  

Behavioral Change through BinCam 
Confirming our pre-study questionnaire results, participants 
reported  in  the  focus  groups  to  either  be  already  good 
recyclers  or  at  least  contemplated  improving  their  waste 
management. It is therefore not surprising that they did not 
report changes in their attitude towards recycling and food 
waste. Yet, findings show interesting social group effects as 
well as an increase in individuals’ awareness, reflection and 
perceived behavioral control related to their waste behavior.  

The Role of Group Coherence in Collective Tasks  
While the disposing of waste is in general an activity to be 
performed by an individual alone, participants reported that 
they sometimes looked at BinPictures together, named their 
bin  collectively,  and  talked  with  each  other  about  the 
project. They exchanged recycling tips and  made plans for 
funny engagements with the bin such as leaving a message 
on  a  banana  skin  in  the  bin  (cf.,  enlarged  BinPicture  in 
Figure 3) or  talked about dismantling the phone  of the bin 
to capture outdoor events to surprise each other. However, 
the  coherence  of  group  efforts  with  regard  to  the  system 
differed  greatly  between  households.  In  one  house,  we 
found that only half of its members had a real interest in the 
project, while in another household all members felt equally 
committed  to  the  project.  That  there  have  been,  in  part, 
effects of local group coherence is apparent in the following 
statements: Tess: “You don’t want to let your house down”; 
and Kate: “Yeah, I felt like we were a team.”  

Social Surveillance  
Moreover,  in  each  household,  participants  reported  having 
felt  guilty  or  ashamed  if  they  disposed  of  recyclables 
incorrectly or had to throw food away. For example, as Ben 
explains:  “Looking at food waste that you’re guilty of and 
your items that you’re guilty of and then thinking I’ve done 
that and I’ve done that and this shouldn’t be in there.”; and 
Beth says about BinCam: “It does make you feel guilty like 
you  did  something  wrong”.  Such  feelings  of  guilt  were  
found  to  be  evoked  by  (i)  the  visibility  of  one’s  own 
behavior to oneself; (ii) the potential visibility of one’s own 
behavior  to  housemates;  (iii)  unfortunate  results  of  one’s 
household  on  the  BinLeague;  and  (iv)  the  perceived 
presence of the BinCam bin.  

Session: Defying Environmental Behavior ChangesCHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA2342In this context, participants also expressed feelings of being 
observed  and  controlled.  Dave:  “I  think  like  every  person 
individually  felt  a  bit  more  like  controlled  in  their 
behavior.”  In  one  household  which  exhibited  stronger 
group  coherence  participants  even  perceived  their  bin  as  a 
social entity itself. For them, their bin “felt like a little flat 
mate  sometimes”  (Mia).  They  also  used  personifying 
attributes  in  their  bin  descriptions,  such  as  the  bin  thinks, 
judges or cares. Lily expounded on this: “When I hid the jar 
it  wasn’t  that  I  was  worried  that  these  guys  would  go  to 
judge me for it. It was more like the BinCam was going to 
judge me for it. I don’t care if these guys saw that I threw 
away  a  jar  because  I  knew  that  they  wouldn’t  care  but  it 
was like Osama [their name of the bin] would care.” 

Awareness, Reflection and Perceived Behavioral Control 
The  strongest  effect  of  the  BinCam  system  on  participants 
is  related  to  raising  their  awareness,  and  stimulation  of 
reflection, about recycling and food waste.  This awareness 
was  sometimes  simply  triggered  through  a  quiet,  yet 
audible, simulated camera shutter carried out each time the 
BinCam bin took its picture. Dave tells: “It [the bin] makes 
you  more  aware  because  you  hear  the  click  and  you  think 
about  it  a  second  time.  Was  it  really  right  that  I  put  it  in 
there  or  wasn’t  it?  And  yeah,  I  think  it  makes  you  more 
aware.” Being reminded about one’s disposal behavior led 
participants to reflect on their recycling skills and abilities. 
Participants  became  more  aware  that  they  had  a  lack  in 
knowledge  as  to  what  is  recyclable  and  what  isn’t.  Jodi 
states: “And you like question yourself if you could actually 
recycle what you just put in the bin.”;  and Sara says: “It’s 
alright  to  sort  of  recycle  but  it’s  very  easy  to  recycle 
wrong.”  This  uncertainty  as  to  how  to  recycle  properly 
encouraged  self-education  among 
the  young  adults. 
Participants reported that they started to read the  labels on 
the  back  of  packages  or  asked  their  housemates  for 
recycling advice. Ben explains: “Erm, and then you sort of 
get to read the back of the package and stuff like that and 
start  looking  what  is  actually  recyclable  (...)  I  find  I  took 
more time to differentiate between what was recyclable and 
what wasn’t recyclable. It was useful for me.” 

to 

reflect  on 

Despite  the  low  usage  of  the  BinPictures  and  BinLeague, 
participants  were  still  persuaded 
the 
relationship  between 
their  ‘food  waste’  and  ‘money 
savings’. Tess explains: “I think it’s a money thing because 
you  see  the  food  you  put  in  the  bin  and  it  makes  you 
shocking  like  ’If  I  had  just  planned  better  I  could  have 
saved  for  another  meal’.  But  now  I  have  to  go  and  spend 
more  money  to  get  more  food.”  Apart  from  the  simple 
skills, 
food  and  one’s 
awareness  about 
participants  also  reflected  about  their  waste  management 
facilities.  Although  willing to recycle, participants  felt that 
there  is no  good  way of  managing  large amounts of bulky 
cardboards  and  plastic  in  their  kitchen,  and  that  the 
container  outside  their  house  fills  up  quickly,  sometimes 
within a day, while only getting emptied every two weeks.  

recycling 

Other Anecdotal Evidence for Behavioral Change 
Although  participants’  attitudes  towards  sustainable  waste 
management  were  positive  from  the  outset,  and  their 
recycling  knowledge  and  facilities  not  ideal,  participants 
tried to improve their waste behavior by creating less food 
waste,  said  that  they  started  sharing  food  left-overs  with 
their  housemates,  were  trying  to  cook  more  appropriate 
meal  portions  and  sometimes  simply  ate  more  instead  of 
disposing the food.  Anna says for instance: “I kind of make 
sure I didn’t cook too much like, erm, I’m better in judging 
portions  than  I  was  before.”  Regarding  food  left-overs, 
Beth states: “Because there’s lots of food in terms of like I 
don’t  want  to  dispose  so  I  just  put  it  out  and  then  people 
can eat it because it’s too much, (…) instead of chucking it 
in the bin straight away”.  

Participants also reported having recycled more and better, 
for  example,  jars  and  tins  were  rinsed  and  washed  out 
before  they  were  put  in  the  bin,  and  composite  packages 
broken  down  into  their  recyclable  and  non-recyclable 
components. Mia describes: “Since we had like the BinCam 
project  bin,  erm,  we’ve  recycled  a  lot  more  than  we 
normally  would,  like  generally  as  a  flat.”;  and  Ben 
explains:  “I  am  much  more  aware  of  making  sure  that 
everything I rinsed wasn’t just, erm, I didn’t put just water 
on  it.  I  rinsed  it  -  I  made  sure  there’s  no  food  residue  or 
anything  like  that.”  One  participant,  Lily,  even  took  out 
items  from  the  BinCam  bin  that  didn’t  belong  in  it.    She 
says:  “I  think  it  was  like  I  wouldn’t  have  given  it  a  rough 
thought before the BinCam project, like there was no way I 
was  going  to  our  bin  and  fishing  out  something  filthy  and 
stuff.  That,  like,  yeah,  it  was  just  the  fact  that  I  was  more 
aware about recycling and I was like, well if we gonna have 
to recycle at least we do it properly.”  

DISCUSSION & LESSONS LEARNED 
BinCam  was  intended  as  a  social  persuasive  system  that 
provides  a  playful  non-intrusive  opportunity  for  young 
adults  to  engage  in  reflections  on  their  waste  management 
behavior.  Findings  of  our  user  study  indicate  that  it  raised 
individuals’ awareness of their recycling and  food  wasting 
behaviors.  Invited  reflections  however  did  not  to  seem  to 
impact  on  participants’  already  well-established  attitudes 
and intentions to improve their behavior, but instead  made 
more salient their perception of how much they control the 
performance of the target behavior. This led participants to 
view  their  disposal  facilities  to  be  insufficient  and  to 
identify deficits in their  knowledge  about  what is or is not 
recyclable.  As  a  result,  participants  started  to  educate 
themselves about recycling properties, exchanged recycling 
expertise  with  others,  and  improved  the  planning  and 
sharing  of  their  food.  Moreover,  participants  responses 
towards  BinCam  were  highly  heterogeneous  and  indicated 
various  motivational  influences  on  both  an  individual  and 
group  level.  These  are  outlined  in  Table  1  and  discussed 
below  along  with  proposed  implications  for  the  design  of 
systems  aiming  to  invite  reflection  and  to  promote  change 
through social media and strategies of social persuasion.  

Session: Defying Environmental Behavior ChangesCHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA2343Table 1. Persuasion in BinCam. 

Identified individual, social & motivational influences in BinCam  

Individual self-reflection 

Informational social 
influence  

Normative social 
influence  

Extrinsic motivation 

Intrinsic motivation 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Feedback about one’s own waste behavior 

Feedback about waste behavior of others 
Discussions and exchange of knowledge 
with flat mates  

Social presence of others offline & online 
Social presence of the bin  

Competition 
Social surveillance 
Signal trigger (BinCam camera sound) 
(Potentially: notifications & reminder)  

Avoidance of feelings of guilt 
Fun experience 
Attitudes & desire to behave appropriately 

Informational Influence on Self and Others  
To  facilitate  interaction  with  BinCam,  the  system  is 
carefully  designed  to  fit  into  daily  routines  such  as  user’s 
regular Facebook and bin use. They are left with the choice 
whether  they  engage  with  the  BinCam  App.  While  this 
voluntary  access  makes  it  easy  to  ignore  the  App,  it  turns 
the act of looking at captured  images into a  conscious and 
not  externally  enforced  activity.  Overcoming  the  natural 
need  for  information,  user  can  access  the  App  to  receive 
feedback about their behaviors and those of others [cf.,4].  

Reflection on Behavior & Learning vs. Immediate Feedback 
Although participants were presented through the App with 
general information about their and other household’s waste 
performances,  they  expressed  the  desire  for  practical 
guidance and information as to how they can improve their 
behavior. BinCam was not designed as a system to educate 
its  users,  but  presents  individuals  with  an  engaging  and 
playful platform for reflection and self-education in order to 
break routines of non-recycling and food waste. To support 
this  purpose  and  to  increase  engagement  with  the  App, 
future  designs  should  enable  users  to  exchange  their 
recycling advice and creative ideas with one another. 

Our  participants  expressed  the  wish  to  receive  immediate 
feedback  from  their  bin  about  whether  their  disposal 
behavior  was  correct.  Although  this  functionality  is  likely 
to  simplify  the  recycling  process  [10it  would  remove  both 
the  need  for  self-motivated  in-depth  reflection  and  their 
efforts  to  inform  themselves  and  learn  about  the  recycling 
properties  of  their  waste  items.  Changes  in  attitudes  and 
behaviors through reflection can result in an internal change 
and  be  long-lasting  [cf.,24].  It  has  to  be  acknowledged, 
however, that reflection is not only motivated by the factors 
outlined  in  Table  1,  but  evoked  through  the  provocative 
character  of  the  system  itself.  In  foregrounding  waste, 
something that usually falls in oblivion once it is discarded, 
it  increases  awareness  and  invites  reflection.  In  addition, 
BinCam  has  been  designed  as  a  collaborative  project 
exploring social processes of influence, whereas immediate 
feedback only functions at the individual level.  

To promote informational social influence, we suggest that 
designs  provide  frequent  feedback  (e.g.  daily  instead  of 

weekly) as  well as diverse  visualizations and opportunities 
for comparisons of own and others’ behavioral data.  

Other Invite Reflections: Abstract Visualizations and BinCam  
While  captured  information  about  a  person’s  behavior 
should  be  accurate  and  reliable,  their  presentation  design 
seems  equally  important  for  it  to  be  understandable  to 
users.  The  BinLeague  presents  through  tree  and  gold 
graphics  an  abstract  and  highly  simplified  view  of  users’ 
collective  recycling  achievements  and  food  savings,  both 
further  limited  due  to  incorrect  taggings  of  collected 
BinPictures  using  AMT.  This  explains  why  some  users 
were  confused  or  dissatisfied  about  the  league  and  its 
visualizations. Yet,  others  were  still able to  make  sense  of 
the 
their 
league.  They  reflected  and  discussed  with 
housemates  how  the  graphics  relate  to  their  behavior,  and 
felt  motivated  to  improve.  We  assume  that  a  less  abstract 
visualization of the tagging results would not have allowed 
for the same fortunate interpretational scope [cf.,26].  

Normative Social Influence 
Overall, the normative social influence in BinCam was not 
as salient as expected. This may be explained by a lack of 
group  coherence  in  the  participating  houses  and  their  little 
engagement with the BinCam App. It may also relate to the 
fact  that  an  individual’s  contribution  to  the  household’s 
waste was not perceived to be associated with the receipt of 
social rewards nor to pose a real threat from housemates for 
non-compliance (i.e. as compared to the council). 

Social Presence of Others in the House – Group Coherence 
Normative  social  influence  is  motivated  by  a  person’s 
desire to obtain social approval from others while avoiding 
being  socially  rejected.  The  influence  is  stronger  the  more 
important  other  people  are  to  the  individual  [6].  Although 
BinCam  was  perceived  as  a  collective  activity,  only  the 
members  of  one  household  reported  true  commitment  to 
each  other  and  felt  responsible  for  household-related 
activities.  A  feeling  of  group  coherence  can  facilitate 
normative social influences [4,6]. We therefore believe that 
a  strong  sense  of  group  coherence,  the  sharing  of  a 
persuasive  system  between  users  and  a  meaningful 
connection  between  them  –  through  their  actions  and 
commitments  –  has  the  potential  to  shape  a  collective 
movement  towards  the  desirable  behavior  [cf.,8].  Thus,  to 
support  group  coherence,  the  interaction  with  the  systems 
should be more strongly designed as a group activity. How 
can design  facilitate the creation of a team identity around 
each  bin?  How  would  the  social  dynamics  in  BinCam 
change  if  participants  of  all  households  knew  each  other 
from  the  outset?  These  issues  deserve  more  attention  in 
future  research,  in  particular  in  terms  of  motivating  group 
commitment, social support or social movements [21].  

Social Presence of Others on Facebook 
Facebook was found to be an appropriate access channel for 
the BinCam App, as it is used regularly and well integrated 
in  the  existing  routines  of  young  adults.  Yet,  participants 
did  not  engage  significantly  with  the  BinCam  App  itself. 

Session: Defying Environmental Behavior ChangesCHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA2344Although  participants  looked  at  the  BinPictures  for  their 
own  household  and  tried  at  times  to  identify  individual 
‘misbehaviors’, the normative social influence was not very 
strong.  To  increase  engagement  with  the  App  and  to  give 
users  reason  to  explore  the  BinPictures,  we  suggest 
designing challenges. Users could be instructed to place an 
object  in  the  bin  to  be  discovered  by  other  households  or 
take  over  the  task  of  tagging  the  BinPictures  as  a 
collaborative  activity.  This  would  allow  for  more  social 
control  and 
to  users’  bin-related 
contributions,  open  up  space  for  playful  or  competitive 
engagements and social opportunities to trick and cheat. 

transparency  as 

Feelings of Guilt & Social Presence of the BinCam Bin 
Participants  did  not  report  feeling  threatened  by  others 
regarding  their  behavior,  but  mentioned  feeling  ‘guilty’  or 
‘ashamed’ when disposing of food or recycling incorrectly. 
It remains subject to future research whether these feelings 
are  primarily  evoked  by  the  presence  of  the  BinCam  bin 
itself,  participant’s  awareness  about  their  behavior  being 
potentially visible to their housemates or the wider BinCam 
community online. In one household, it was remarkable that 
participants perceived their BinCam bin as a “social actor” 
[11],  and  described  a  related  influence  on  their  behavior. 
We believe that the presence of the bin and its ‘monitoring’ 
of  what  a  person  discards  facilitate  individuals  to  perform 
more socially desirable behaviors, in ways similar to having 
a  housemate  in  the  kitchen  watching  the  person’s  actions 
[12].  Despite  certain  inscrutability  about  the  source  of 
authority, we confirm findings of [13] that evoking aversive 
feelings can motivate compliance, if designed playfully. 

Facilitators for Performing the Target Behavior 

Facilities and Abilities to Perform the Behavior 
In  addition  to  having  the  intention  to  perform  a  certain 
behavior,  a  person  needs  to  have  the  ability  to  do  so 
[cf.,2,20].  As  shown  with  BinCam,  this  includes  having 
adequate  waste  management  facilities  as  well  as  the 
appropriate  ‘know  how’  and  confidence  to  perform  the 
behavior. BinCam successfully invited individuals to reflect 
on  their  perceived  behavioral  control.  Being  situated  in 
their  homes,  it  made  them  more  aware  of  ‘how’  they 
manage  or  mismanage  their  waste  and  revealed  a  certain 
complexity behind waste-related actions. 

Trigger and Reminder 
The sound of the BinCam bin camera was found to act as a 
‘signal  trigger’,  reminding  participants  of  the  presence  of 
the  BinCam  system  and  prompting  thoughts  about  their 
waste management. According to Fogg’s Behavioral Model 
[10],  triggers  are,  along  with  a  person’s  motivation  and 
ability  to  perform  the  target  behavior,  the  most  powerful 
element  to  change  behavior.  Despite  the  low  usage  of  the 
BinCam App, its very existence – reflecting the potential of 
one’s behavior being visible to others – added significance 
to  the  ‘signal  trigger’.  However,  to  persuade  users  to  re-
visit the BinCam App more regularly, the App should adapt 
to  the  ecology  of  Facebook  and  more  closely  integrate  its 

existing  interaction  and  persuasion  styles.  Future  versions 
will  also  incorporate  reminders  and  notifications  about 
interesting ongoing activities and users’ progress. 

Flexibility towards Individual Preferences and Needs 
The  heterogeneous 
findings  of  how  BinCam  was 
appropriated by its users show that persuasive technologies 
should  be  adaptable  to  inter-individual  expectations  and 
needs.  Users  differ  in  their  attitudes,  motives  and  habits 
related  to  social  platforms,  like  Facebook,  and  they  have 
different  preferences  for  the  frequency  and  presentation  of 
feedback.  That  individuals  are  at  “different  stages  of 
readiness,  willingness  and  ableness  to  change”  [1,  p.927] 
also effects their receptiveness of persuasive influences.  In 
order to appeal to a wide range of users and to successfully 
informational  and 
fulfill 
motivational needs [24], persuasive designs  should employ 
a combination of persuasive strategies to promote change.  

their  constantly  changing 

Ethical Issues  
In BinCam, participants were more aware of their behavior 
or  misbehavior,  while  the  interaction  with  the  system 
evoked  feelings  of  guilt  or  shame.  Although  potentially 
effective  [cf.,13],  it  raises  ethical  concerns  as  to  whether 
persuasive  designs  should  employ  strategies  that  originate 
aversive  emotions  to  induce  behavioral  change.  In  Fogg’s 
[12] understanding, persuasion does  not include the  use of 
force and is neither coercive, nor manipulative or deceitful. 
Feelings  of  guilt  or  shame  in  BinCam,  however  were  not 
directly evoked through the system or external pressures of 
others  observing,  but  primarily  based  on  an  internal 
evaluation resulting from users’ increased awareness of the 
discrepancy  between 
ideal 
the  privacy 
behavior.  Furthermore,  and  considering 
concerns  raised,  BinCam  should  be  regarded  as  playful 
reflection  stimulating  intervention  that  finds  temporarily 
acceptance  in  peoples’  lives,  if  users  remain  in  control  of 
their  data  and  know  to  whom  it  is  visible.  It  is  neither  an 
obscure monitoring device nor to be used by third parties.  

their  own  perceived  and 

Limitations of the Evaluation 
The  sample  of  our  study  was  small  and  participants,  from 
the outset, reported being motivated to recycle and prevent 
food  waste.  Since  participation  was  voluntary,  this  may 
confirm a tendency identified by Strengers [27], where eco-
feedback  systems  are  generally  more  appealing  to  people 
who are environmentally motivated. In addition to recycling 
constraints,  this  may  further  explain  why  our  quantitative 
results  did  not  show  significant  effects.  Above  all,  our 
results are solely based on individuals’ self-reports in focus 
groups.  We  found  however  that  participants  responded 
equally  and  were  notably  uninhibited  to  share  personal 
feelings  of  guilt  or  of  being  observed  by  others.  Despite 
these  limitations,  we  believe  that  the  exploratory  character 
of  the  study,  the  authentic  deployment  of  the  BinCam 
system  into  an  everyday  setting  as  well  as  reported  user 
experiences  provide  a  valuable  lens  onto  the  potential  use 
of social media and social group dynamics to engage people 
in reflections on their behavior and to persuade change. 

Session: Defying Environmental Behavior ChangesCHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA2345self-education 

CONCLUSION  
BinCam is a social persuasive system designed to playfully 
engage  young  adults  collectively  in  reflections  on  their 
waste management lifestyle. While deployments of BinCam 
in shared households did not impact on participants’ already 
well-established  attitudes  or  intentions  to  improve  their 
behavior,  it  increased  their  perceived  behavioral  control. 
Invited reflections helped identify barriers in their personal 
abilities,  motivated 
recycling 
properties and improved their planning and sharing of food. 
Behavioral feedback was presented through BinPictures and 
the  BinLeague,  which  provide  a  source  for  informational 
and normative social influences. At times, aversive feelings 
of  guilt  for  non-recycling  or  the  disposal  of  food  were 
evoked,  that  did  not  disengage  but  motivate  individuals  in 
using  the  system  and  improving  their  behavior.  A  neat 
integration  of  BinCam  into  the  existing  structures  of 
individuals’ 
logging,  access  and 
exploration  of  collected  data.  We  envisage  our  work  will 
motivate  future  HCI  research  bridging  social  media  and 
strategies of social persuasion to promote change.  

lives  facilitated 

about 

the 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The  authors  thank  their  participants,  the  reviewers  of  the 
paper as well as Stephen Lindsay, Daniel O’Connor, David 
Kirk,  John  Shearer  and  Nick  Taylor.  This  work  was 
supported  by  Microsoft  Research 
its  PhD 
Scholarship Programme.  

through 

REFERENCES 
1.  Ai He, H., Greenberg, S., and Huang, E.M. One size does 

not fit all: applying the transtheoretical model to energy 
feedback technology design. Proc. CHI 2010, 927-936. 

2.  Ajzen, I. The theory of planned behavior. Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 1991, 50, 179-
211. 

3.  Braun, V., and Clarke, V. Using thematic analysis in 

psychology. Qualitative Research in Psychology, 2006, 3, 
77-101. 

4.  Cialdini, R.B., and Goldstein, N.J. Social influence: 

Compliance and conformity, Annual Reviews Psychology, 
2004, 55, 591-621. 

5.  Consolvo, S., McDonald, D.W., and Landay, J.A. Theory-
driven design strategies for technologies that support 
behavior change in everyday life. Proc. CHI 2009, 405-
414. 

6.  Deutsch, M., and Gerard, H.G. A study of normative and 
informational social influence upon individual judgment. 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 1955, 51, 
629-636. 

7.  DiSalvo, C., Sengers, P., and Hrönn, B. Mapping the 
landscape of sustainable HCI. Proc. CHI 2010, 1975-
1984. 

8.  Dourish. P. HCI and environmental sustainability: the 
politics of design and the design of politic. Proc. DIS 
2010, 1-10. 

9.  Ellison, N.B., Steinfield, C., and Lampe C. The benefits of 
facebook “friends”: Social capital and college students’ 
use of online social network sites. Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, 2007, 12(4), 1143-1168. 

10.  Fogg, B.J. A behavioral model for persuasive design. 

Proc. Persuasive 2006. 

11.  Fogg, B.J. Persuasive Technology: Using computers to 

change what we think and do, Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.  

12.  Fogg, B.J., Cuellar, G., and Danielson, D.  Motivating, 

influencing, and persuading users. In J. Jacko and A. 
Sears (eds.), The human-computer interaction handbook: 
Fundamentals, Evolving Technologies and Emerging 
Applications, L. Erlbaum Associates Inc., 2002.  

13.  Foster, D., Linehan, C., Lawson, J., and Kirman, B. Power 
ballads: Deploying aversive energy feedback in social 
media. Ext. Abst. CHI 2011, 2221-2226. 

14.  Fröhlich, J., et al. UbiGreen: Investigating a mobile tool 
for tracking and supporting green transportation habits, 
Proc. CHI 2009, 1043-1052. 

15.  Gartland, A., and Piasek, P. Weigh your waste: A 

sustainable way to reduce waste. Ext. Abst. CHI 2009, 
2853-2858.  

16.  Godin, G., and Kok, G. The theory of planned behaviour: 
A review of its applications to health-related behaviours. 
American Journal of Health Promotion, 1996, 11(2), 87-
98. 

17.  Holmes, T. Eco-visualization: Combining art and 

technology to reduce energy consumption. Proc. C&C 
2007, 153-162. 

18.  Li, I., Dey, A.K., and Forlizzi, J. A Stage-Based Model of 
Personal Informatics Systems. Proc. CHI 2010, 557-566. 

19.  Love Food Hate Waste. Last retrieved 05.12.2010, 

www.lovefoodhatewaste.com 

20.  Maio, G.R., and Haddock, G. The psychology of attitudes 
and attitude change. London: SAGE, 2010, 67-77. 

21.  Mankoff, J.C. et al. Leveraging Social Networks To 
Motivate Individuals to Reduce their Ecological 
Footprints. Proc. HICSS 2007, 1-10. 

22.  Matthews, M., and Doherty, G. In the mood: Engaging 
teenagers in psychotherapy using mobile phones. Proc. 
CHI 2011, 2947-2956. 

23.  Paulos, E., and Jenkins, T. Urban Probes: Encountering 
our emerging urban atmospheres. Proc. CHI 2005, 341-
350. 

24.  Prochaska, J.O., DiClemente, C.C., and Norcross, J.C. In 
Search of How People Change: Applications to Addictive 
Behaviors, American Psychologist ,1992, 47(9), 1102-
1114. 

25.  Reif, I., et al. Cleanly – Trashducation urban system. Ext. 

Abst. CHI 2010, 3511-3516.  

26.  Sengers, P., and Gaver, B. Staying open to interpretation: 
Engaging multiple meanings in design and evaluation. 
Proc. DIS 2006, 99-108. 

27.  Strengers, Y. Designing eco-feedback systems for 
everyday life. Proc. CHI 2011, 2135-2144. 

28.  Waste and Resources Action Programme. Last retrieved 

29.12.2010 , www.wrap.org.uk 

29.  WRAP. Research Guidance: Monitoring and evaluation 

guidance (Annex 3). Last retrieved 27.06.2011, 
www.wrap.org.uk/local_ authorities/research_ guidance 

30.  Ybarra, O., and Trafimow, D. How priming the private 
self or collective self affects the relative weights of 
attitudes and subjective norms. Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 1998, 362-370. 

Session: Defying Environmental Behavior ChangesCHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA2346