When Personal Tracking Becomes Social: 
Examining the Use of Instagram for Healthy Eating 
Chia-Fang Chung1, Elena Agapie1, Jessica Schroeder2, Sonali Mishra3, James Fogarty2, Sean A. Munson1 
1Human Centered Design & Engineering, 2Computer Science & Engineering, 3The Information School 
DUB Group, University of Washington 
{cfchung, eagapie, jesscs, srmishra, jaf1978, smunson}@uw.edu 

ABSTRACT 
Many people appropriate social media and online communities 
in  their  pursuit  of  personal  health  goals,  such  as  healthy 
eating or increased physical activity. However, people struggle 
with  impression  management,  and  with  reaching  the  right 
audiences  when  they  share  health  information  on  these 
platforms.  Instagram,  a  popular  photo-based  social  media 
platform, has attracted many people who post and share their 
food photos. We aim to inform the design of tools to support 
healthy behaviors by understanding how people appropriate 
Instagram  to  track  and  share  food  data,  the  benefits  they 
obtain  from  doing  so,  and  the  challenges  they  encounter. 
We  interviewed  16  women  who  consistently  record  and 
share  what  they  eat  on  Instagram.  Participants  tracked  to 
support  themselves  and  others  in  their  pursuit  of  healthy 
eating  goals.  They  sought  social  support  for  their  own 
tracking  and  healthy  behaviors  and  strove  to  provide  that 
support  for  others.  People  adapted  their  personal  tracking 
practices  to  better  receive  and  give  this  support.  Applying 
these  results  to  the  design  of  health  tracking  tools  has  the 
potential to help people better access social support. 

Author Keywords 
Self-Tracking; Personal Informatics; Social Support; 
Health; Social Media; Food Journals. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.m. Information interfaces and presentation (e.g., HCI).  

INTRODUCTION 
Many  people  use  social  media  and  online  communities  to 
support  healthy  behavior  change  [31]  and  chronic  disease 
[43,53].  Some  seek  emotional  support, 
management 
accountability,  motivation,  and  information  from  others on 
these  platforms  [43].  Others  keep  track  of  illness-related 
symptoms, hoping these data could lead to better diagnoses 
and  treatments  [53].  However,  user  concern  about  how 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 
CHI 2017, May 06 - 11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA 
Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. 
ACM 978-1-4503-4655-9/17/05…$15.00  
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025747 

health  information  may  affect  their  image  influences  what 
and with whom they are comfortable sharing. 

Since the launch of Instagram in 2010, the mobile photo- and 
video-based  social  media  app  has  rapidly  increased  its  user 
base  to  over  600  million  people  [47].  Food  photos  are 
particularly  prevalent  [37],  and  the  popularity  of  food  photos 
has drawn attention from HCI and CSCW researchers. Using 
Instagram as a food photo database [38], researchers were able 
to  identify  food  deserts  [11]  and  associate  eating  habits  with 
locations  [36].  Researchers  have  also  examined  how  the 
platform is used to promote eating disorder behavior [9,45]. 

Some people post food photos to Instagram to support their 
health  goals,  using  it  as  an  everyday  tracking  tool  as  they 
pursue healthy eating choices. Understanding why and how 
people  appropriate  Instagram  to  track  and  share  food  data 
has the potential to inform system design to support healthy 
eating.  We  look  at  people’s  practices  through  different 
stages  of  tracking:  their  choice  of  Instagram  among  other 
tracking  tools,  their  tracking  and  reflection  practices,  and 
their  lapses  of  tracking.  To  answer  the  following  research 
questions, we conducted an interview study with 16 people 
who frequently record and share what they eat on Instagram: 

•  Why  and  how  do  people  keep  track  of  their  food  on 

Instagram to support their health goals? 

•  How  does  social  interaction  affect  their  health  tracking 

decisions and tracking behavior on Instagram? 

extends  other  personal 

We found that people track their food on Instagram with a 
mix of co-existing goals: recording what they eat, receiving 
social  support,  and  providing  social  support.  We  use  the 
lived informatics model [21] as a lens to examine different 
phases  participants  experience  regarding  tracking  and 
sharing  what  they  eat  on  Instagram.  The  lived  informatics 
informatics  models 
model 
(e.g., [29])  to  describe  the  decision  to  track,  tool  selection, 
and  lapsing  and  resumption  of  tracking.  Using  this  model 
supported our analysis of how and why participants choose 
Instagram  for  food  tracking  among  other  tools;  how  they 
iteratively track and act on these food posts (collecting data, 
integrating 
they 
intentionally  or  unintentionally  lapse  and  resume  tracking. 
We  found  that  participants  adapt  their  personal  tracking 
behavior  in  every  tracking  stage  to  receive  and  provide 
better social support. 

it,  and  reflecting  on 

it);  and  how 

Social Computing and HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA1674 
 
Building  upon  prior work on health information sharing  in 
online  communities,  we  discuss  how  participants  use 
Instagram  features  to  help  receive  social  support  while 
maintaining  their  needs  for  impression  management.  We 
also  reflect  on  these  findings  to  discuss  how  social  needs 
could  be  integrated  into  personal  informatics  models  and 
inform the design of future health tracking tools. 

BACKGROUND 
Our study of how people appropriate Instagram to track and 
share  their  food  was  informed  by  prior  research  on 
technologies  to  support  healthy  eating  and  how  people 
share their health tracking data with other people. To situate 
sharing of food posts on Instagram within broader research on 
online  health  information  sharing,  we  also  draw  upon  prior 
research on health information sharing in online communities.  

Self-tracking and Personal Informatics Models 
People  use  a  myriad  of  self-tracking  tools  to  collect  and 
reflect  on  their  personal  information.  To  understand  how 
people  use  these  tools  and  the  information  they  collect, 
Li et al.  developed  the  five-staged  personal  informatics 
model [29]:  preparation,  collection,  integration,  reflection, 
and  action.  They  later  expanded  the  reflection  stage  to 
maintenance and discovery phases [30]. 

Rooksby et al. proposed “lived informatics” to describe the 
intertwined roles of self-tracking plays in people’s everyday 
life  [49].  They  also  described  various  goals  people  have 
while  adopting  self-tracking  practices,  such  as  behavior 
change, curiosity, or instrumental purposes (having a record, 
receiving 
incentives,  and  maintaining  a  relationship). 
Epstein et al. later developed the lived informatics model [21] 
to  better  describe  people’s  tool  selection  choices,  the 
concurrent  and  iterative  nature  of  collection,  integration, 
and  reflection,  as  well  as  the  lapse  or  resumption  of 
tracking.  The  lived  informatics  model  has  three  major 
stages:  (1)  Deciding  and  selecting:  In  this  stage,  people 
make  decisions  about  tracking  and  choose  the  tools  they 
want  to  use.  (2)  Tracking  and  acting:  People  collect  data 
about  themselves,  integrate  that  data  (sometimes  across 
several  tools  or  data  sources),  and  reflect  on  the  data  they 
collected.  (3)  Lapsing  and  resuming:  People  periodically 
forget, intentionally skip, or suspend tracking. 

Prior studies of self-tracking to support healthy eating goals 
have examined ways to ease the burden of collection and to 
include  social  features  to  encourage  collection,  reflection 
and  action.  In 
in-depth 
understanding  of  how  people  appropriate  social  media  for 
personal  tracking.  Our  findings  add  to  the  current  personal 
informatics  models  and  inform  various  ways  social  needs 
influence personal tracking decisions and practices. 

this  study,  we  provide  an 

Technologies to Support Healthy Eating Goals 
Traditional  methods  for  tracking  food  to  support  healthy 
eating  have  relied  on  associating  ingredients  with  calories 
(e.g.,  MyFitnessPal);  tracking  food  with  app-computed 
scores (e.g., Weight Watchers Smart Points, a food scoring 

system  used  by  Weight  Watchers  based  on  calories, 
saturated fat, sugar, and protein); or scanning food barcodes 
to  avoid  the  need  to  enter  ingredients  (e.g.,  the  Weight 
Watchers  app).  These  food  journals  usually  rely  on  food 
databases, which are not comprehensive: they usually only 
contain  common  food  items  and  recipes,  and  they  do  not 
account for variability of ingredients in the actual food people 
eat  [17].  Furthermore,  people  using  such  databases  often 
start  eating  more  packaged  food,  because  it  is  relatively 
easy  to  track  foods  with  barcodes  or  that  are  otherwise 
mass-produced.  This  nudge  is  often  at  odds  with  their 
healthy  eating  goals.  Even  if  a  comprehensive  database 
existed,  item-by-item  tracking  is  tedious  and  difficult  to 
perform in certain social contexts, which makes it difficult 
to develop a reliable, long-term habit of food tracking. 

Researchers  have  investigated  approaches  to  enhance  the 
tracking experience and address these issues, such as making 
tracking  easier  and  more  engaging  through  photo-based 
journals  [16,35],  participating  in  food  challenges  [20], 
recording  voice  memos  of  food  experiences  [23],  or 
automatically taking photos of food [4,51]. These lightweight 
journaling  methods  can  support  people’s  health  goals  and 
increase  their  awareness  of  their  eating  habits,  including 
unhealthy  eating  [6,16,42,55].  In  particular,  photo-based 
food journals make it easier to collect data, assess progress, 
and  track  failures  such  as  unintended  larger  meals  [16]. 
However, photo-based tracking also generally means a lack 
of  caloric  data  relevant  to  many  health  goals,  and  many 
people still forget to track their  food. In a similar tradeoff, 
fully  automated  solutions  can  make  information  capture 
easier,  but  they  have  also  been  found  to  reduce  the 
mindfulness that people gain from food tracking [54]. 

Previous food tracking systems have often been designed to 
help people improve their behaviors. Researchers have also 
called  for  more  research  and  design  focusing  on  positive 
interactions  and  experiences  with  food,  such  as  aspects  of 
family  connectedness,  food  as  gifting,  creativity,  and 
pleasure or nostalgia in creating food [24]. 

self-tracking 

Health Tracking with Social Sharing 
Prior  research  has  explored  how  social  features  can  help 
engage  people  with 
technologies  and 
encourage  behavior  change  [32,46,48].  The  addition  of 
social features can help users consistently meet their health 
goals [6,15], can help people receive support through social 
interactions,  and  can  encourage  a  feeling  of  accountability 
to  others  [18].  People  also  often  value  understanding 
other’s emotions in relation to their food experiences [23]. 

Baumer  et  al.  introduced  VERA,  a  photo-based  system  in 
which a user posted a picture of a “health-related” decision 
they  made  and  others  could  comment  [5].  By  leaving  the 
definition of “healthy” to each user’s interpretation, people 
could  decide  for  themselves  what  constituted  a  healthy 
lifestyle.  In  a  follow-up  study,  they  found  that  users  who 
interacted  with  others  who  shared  their  goals  stayed  more 
engaged  on  VERA  [2].  Community  Mosaic,  another 

Social Computing and HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA1675photo-based  system,  allowed  users  to  send  messages  of 
food photos to a local community server with explicit goals 
to  help  community  members  improve  their  healthy  diet 
practice. These photos were later shared anonymously in a 
public  kiosk  where  other  community  members  could  rate 
whether the photo was inspirational [44]. By thinking about 
how  to  provide  helpful  food  photos,  users  reflect  on  their 
own food choices and preparation processes. 

People with potentially stigmatized illnesses, such as anorexia 
or depression, approach Tumblr and Instagram for recovery 
support [8]. Although these sites can help people struggling 
with such illnesses, they can also introduce new challenges, 
such  as  exposure  to  pro-anorexic  sentiment  [8]  or  negative 
comments [3]. People trade off these concerns and benefits, 
along  with  the  needs  for  impression  management  [43],  to 
decide where and with whom they share health information. 

Although  social  features  can  motivate  people  to  use 
self-tracking technologies, they can also introduce impression 
management concerns for their users [15], especially when 
the  tracking  technology  appropriates  existing  social  media 
platforms.  In  an  online  experiment,  automatically  posting 
announcements  of  their  weekly  physical  activity  goals  on 
Facebook  decreased  people’s  willingness  to  set  goals  [40]. 
Furthermore,  systems  that  allow  people  to  share  their 
progress  on  Facebook  can  cause  anxiety  about  cluttering 
friend news feeds or appearing boring [41]. 

Sharing Health Information in Online Health Communities 
According  to  a  2013  survey,  72%  of  US  internet  users 
search for health information online [22]. Many people also 
turn  to  online  groups  for  social  support  as  they  pursue 
lifestyle change goals [31] or manage illnesses [27]. People 
find guidance and motivation in the day-to-day experiences 
of  people  with  similar  health  challenges  or  similar  health 
goals [13,26,27,31]. They also pursue emotional support in 
these  online  health  communities.  People  were  able  to  find 
and develop a strong sense of community with people who 
had  similar  experiences  [28,33,34]  and  receive  emotional 
support  to  help  them  move  through  difficult  recoveries  or 
struggles to adopt lifestyle changes [26,31,43].  

People  have  appropriated  social  media,  such  as  Facebook 
and  Twitter,  for  searching,  sharing  health  information,  and 
seeking social support from pre-existing relationships [11,43]. 

We studied food journaling on Instagram to understand how 
people  combine  photo-based  food  journaling  and  social 
interactions  in  public  Instagram  communities  to  support 
their  healthy  eating  goals.  We  found  people  chose 
Instagram as a self-tracking tool because of opportunities to 
both  receive  and  provide  social  support.  They  also  weigh 
tradeoffs  between  consistent  tracking,  social  support,  and 
impression  management  to  make  ongoing  decisions  about 
what to track, whether and how to act, and when to lapse. 

METHODS 
We conducted semi-structured interviews with 16 participants 
who self-identify as using Instagram to support their healthy 
eating and/or fitness goals. We recruited participants through 
a pre-screening survey shared via researcher social networks, 
direct  messages  to  Instagram  users  who  use  specific  food 
tracking  hashtags  (#fooddiary  and  #foodjournal)  and  use 
English in their posts, and snowball sampling via interview 
participants.  Each  interview  participant  was  compensated 
with a $10 gift card. Participants were primarily located in 
the US, with two from the UK (I09 and I11, Table1). 

We asked participants why they decided to use Instagram to 
pursue their health goals and what their Instagram practices 
and  experiences  were  regarding  healthy  eating.  We  also 
asked  whether  and  how 
interacted  with  other 
Instagram  users,  as  well  as  what  role  Instagram  played  in 
supporting their health goals in relation to other self-tracking 

they 

Participant 
Number 

Age 

Instagram 
Experience 
(months) 
> 12 
> 12 
> 12 

Food Posting 
Experience 
(months) 
6  
6  
6  

25-34 
25-34 
18-24 

I01 
I02 
I03 

I04 

I05 
I06 
I07 
I08 

I09 
I10 
I11 
I12 
I13 
I14 
I15 
I16 

18-24 

> 12 

6-12  

25-34 
25-34 
25-34 
18-24 

18-24 
25-34 
25-34 
25-34 
25-34 
18-24 
25-34 
25-34 

6-12  
6  
6-12  
> 12 

> 12 
6-12  
> 12 
> 12 
> 12 
> 12 
> 12 
> 12 

6-12  
6  
6-12  
6-12  

6-12 
6  
> 12 
> 12 
6-12  
> 12 
> 12 
6-12  

Number of 
Followers 

Number 
Following 

Health Goals 

Self-Identified 
Community 

Occupation 

198 
462 
362 

260 

377 
323 
218 
9721 

1991 
3345 
3005 
98 
1066 
1276 
6646 
3455 

81  Conscious eating  None 

Keto Diet 
None 

None 

N/A 
N/A 
Student 

Student 

857  Ketogenic diet 
536  Eating disorder 
recovery 

66  Healthy cooking 
and eating 

323  Weight loss 
415  Weight loss 
224  Weight loss 

1377  Healthy eating and 

fitness 
388  Weight loss 
133  Weight loss 
1081  Ketogenic Diet 

None 
Weight Watchers 
None 
Bikini Body Guide  Eating disorder center worker 

Video games 
Stay-home Mom 
Homemaker 

MyFitnessPal 
Weight Watchers  N/A 
Keto Diet 

Caretaker in children’s home 

YouTube content creator 
Student 

158  Conscious Eating  None 
548  Fitness 
673  Fitness 
144  Weight loss 
288  Weight loss 

Bikini Body Guide  Victim advocate 
Bikini Body Guide  Marketing 
Weight Watchers  N/A 
Weight Watchers 

Event planner & space coordinator 

Table 1: Interview participant demographics, health goals, and community affiliations. 

Social Computing and HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA1676tools, social media, and online communities. The interviews 
lasted  45  to  77  (M  =  60)  minutes.  All  interviews  were 
audio-recorded and transcribed for further analysis. 

We adopted a mix of inductive and deductive approaches to 
analyze  the  data.  Four  researchers  first  each  coded  two 
transcripts  and  discussed  the  emergent  codes,  organizing 
the  codes  via  affinity  diagramming  and  creating  a  code 
book  based  on  our  original  research  questions,  the  lived 
informatics  model  [21],  and  a  prior  study  on  adopting 
online communities and social media to support health [43].  

Prior  research  on  food  journaling  and  other  personal 
informatics  domains  has  shown  that  tool  selection  is 
important for later tracking and action; that data collection, 
reflection,  and  action  are  often  concurrent  or  iterative;  and 
that  both  short  term  lapses  and  abandonment  are  common. 
We chose to use the lived informatics model to inform our 
analysis because it best captures these characteristics. 

People share health information in online health communities 
to  seek  emotional  support,  motivation,  accountability,  and 
information  [43].  We  analyzed  our  data  based  on  these 
social  support  needs  to  understand  whether  and  how  they 
influence  participants  in  their  choice  to  use  Instagram  and 
in their tracking and sharing behaviors on Instagram. 

We then recoded the same two transcripts using the code book, 
augmenting  with  codes  that  emerged  through  the  process. 
After  discussion,  the  code  book  was  updated  with  the 
emerging codes and used to code the remaining transcripts.  

WHY  AND  HOW  DO  PEOPLE  TRACK  WHAT  THEY  EAT 
ON INSTAGRAM TO SUPPORT HEALTHY EATING? 
Our  participants  use  Instagram  because  it  allows  them  to 
keep  a  record  of  activities  relevant  to  their  health  goals, 
while  obtaining  and  providing  social  support  and 
information  to  communities  with  which  they  identify. 
People primarily record what they eat and cook. We use the 
lived informatics model [21] to describe personal tracking in 
stages. Understanding why people use Instagram for healthy 
eating  goals  and  how  they  use  Instagram  in  each  of  these 
stages can provide insights about people’s evolving goals and 
unmet needs. Because reflection happened both concurrently 
with  collection  and  integration  (as  suggested  by  the  lived 
informatics model) and on its own at a later time, we discuss 
reflection separately from collection and integration.  

Through the lens of the lived informatics model, we describe 
health, instrumental, and social-support goals of participants. 
Many participants sought to improve their health behaviors, 
while others tracked for instrumental goals such as building an 
audience  or  educating  others.  These  goals  were  not  mutually 
exclusive.  Some  participants  also  sought  social  support 
through  their  tracking  behavior.  We  relate  the  pursuit  of 
receiving and providing social benefits to the type of tracking 
activities participants perform. We discuss how these themes 
manifest in the different stages of the lived informatics model. 

Deciding to Track and Selecting Tools 
The lived informatics model suggests people select tracking 
tools  based  on  features,  aesthetics,  and  conveniences  [21]. 
Our participants chose to use Instagram because it provided 
an easier, more fun, and more social way to track what they 
eat. Contrary to the individual focus of the lived informatics 
model,  they  also  often  wanted  to  motivate  and  encourage 
others  to  maintain  their  health.  Many  participants  had 
experience  with  or  were  concurrently  using  other  tools  to 
record calories and nutrient details in addition to recording 
food photos on Instagram, such as MyFitnessPal (I01, I02, 
I05,  I06,  I07,  I09,  I11,  I14),  the  official  Weight  Watchers 
app (I06, I16), iTrackBites (I15), or YouFood (I15). Others 
also  used  Fitbit  (I04,  I07,  I08,  I13)  or  Polar  watch  (I12, 
I14) to track their physical activities and posted screenshots 
or photos of those activities on Instagram. 

Photo-based food tracking is perceived as fun  
Participants considered tracking and sharing food photos on 
Instagram  as  an  engaging  experience,  which  helped  them 
sustain  their  interests  and  keep  a  record  of  what  they  ate. 
Food  photos  feel  closer  to  people’s  experiences  than  text 
descriptions: “I think the fact that Instagram is much more 
visually  stimulating  [than  MyFitnessPal],  really  makes  the 
people  more  real,  or  it  makes  the  goals  more  real.”  (I07). 
I05  described  how  this  increased  engagement  helped  her 
maintain food journaling not just on Instagram, but also on 
MyFitnessPal:  “I  have  a  streak  on  MyFitnessPal  since 
February (over five months at the time of interview). Before 
I  would  just  use  MyFitnessPal  for  maybe  two  weeks  and 
then be like, this is too hard and I stop. … It's really helpful 
to have all the photos because if I forget to enter it in or if 
I'm busy during the day, I can enter it at the end of the day 
and I have an accurate log of what I ate.” 

Photo-based food tracking is perceived as socially appropriate 
Consistent  with  prior  evaluations  of  mobile-based  food 
journaling  [16],  participants  considered  using  photos  to 
record  what  they  eat  easier  and  more  socially  appropriate 
than  a  traditional  mobile  food  journal:  “If  I  was  out  with 
friends  or  something,  then  a  quick  snapshot  of  the  food 
would be easier than saying, ‘Hold on guys, I need to pull 
up  MyFitnessPal  and  put  everything  down  and  the  right 
serving size’” (I07). As a result, some participants believed 
tracking  with  photos  better  supported  their  health  goals 
because  they  could  easily  take  a  photo  whenever  they  ate 
rather than entering all food entries at the end of the day or 
when they are free: “[I’d rather] post frequently throughout 
the day and have short little posts [on Instagram] than do big 
long posts and do them once a day [using other tools]” (I15). 

Instagram helps people find community support 
Many  participants  chose  Instagram  for  the  social  support 
they can gain through the many people using Instagram for 
healthy  eating  goals.  Participants  discovered 
these 
communities through prior experiences using Instagram for 
general  use  (I01,  I02,  I03,  I04,  I07,  I09,  I11),  friend 
recommendations  (I05,  I12),  or  other  health  communities 
such  as  Weight  Watchers  (I06,  I10,  I15,  I16)  or  Bikini 

Social Computing and HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA1677Body  Guide  (I08,  I13,  I14).  Many  participants  found 
Instagram  users  more  supportive  than  users  of  other  social 
media platforms. For example, I05 did not think Facebook 
was a proper place to share her everyday diet and workout: 
“A  lot  of  my  friends  on  social  media  are  acquaintances  or 
old coworkers … they have some connection to you but not 
enough so that they care about actually supporting you.”  

To  find  communities,  participants  often  augmented  their 
posts  with  hashtags.  They  decided  which  hashtags  to  use 
based  on  other  people’s  posts  or  popular  food  hashtags 
from  Instagram’s  autofill  features.  They  also  learned  new 
hashtags  by  noting  ones  that  were  used  concurrently  with 
the ones they knew. After determining whether the hashtag 
caught  the  attention  of  people  they  wanted  to  attract 
(e.g., people  belonging  to  specific  communities,  such  as 
#weightwatchers),  they  gradually  settled  on  a  fixed  set  of 
hashtags  used  for  most  of  their  posts.  I07  explained:  “I 
think the hashtags [help] us find each other …. If I was just 
posting  these  photos  to  an  empty  wall,  there  was  no  way 
that  I'd  be  connected  to  others  with  similar  goals  to  me.” 
Hashtags are especially useful for people following a specific 
program  or  participating  in  an  event.  I08  met  other  women 
participating in the same health challenge through hashtags 
(e.g.,  #oneperfectweek)  and  would  use  such  tags  to  find 
updates  from  others  at  a  similar  stage  of  progress.  Many 
participants  also  use  hashtags  to  find  people  across 
communities.  For  example,  participants  who  investigated 
hashtags  like  "#caloriecounting"  or  "#weightloss"  often 
encountered Instagrammers who subscribed to alternate diet 
plans.  Through  this  exploration,  they  discovered  different 
diet and exercise routines. 

Instagram allows people to motivate and educate others 
Some  participants  chose  Instagram  because  it  gave  them  a 
way  to  share  their  experience  with,  motivate,  and  educate 
other  people.  I06  mentioned  that  she  started  posting  food 
and workouts on Instagram because she wanted her weight 
loss  experience  to  motivate  others:  “Like  people  that  are 
trying to lose weight and get healthy and might need some 
extra motivation or just feel stuck or maybe discouraged. I 
had hoped they would find me, and I could help inspire and 
motivate them in some way.” Similarly, I04 started to share 
her  cooking  on  Instagram  to  help  friends  who  wanted  to 
improve their cooking skills to eat healthier. These cooking 
posts  often  led  to  comments,  messages,  and  even  phone 
calls from friends wanting food preparation details: “‘What 
flour  did  you  use,  and  how  did  you  get  it?  Can  you  come 
and teach me?’ Then we just had this discussion about the 
same thing or maybe you should try it this way” (I04). 

Collection and Integration 
In our analysis, collection occurs when participants post about 
their food or fitness on Instagram. We define integration as 
incorporating other information related to their health goals 
in  the  photos  or  captions.  The  lived  informatics  model 
suggests  people  collect  and  integrate  data  differently 
depending  on  their  motivation  for  tracking.  For  example, 

people  who  track  to  change  their  behavior  usually  track 
frequently,  while  instrumental  trackers  collect  data  when 
the  benefits  outweigh  the  costs.  Participants  also  integrate 
data  when  integration  generates  insight.  Our  participants 
tracked for a mix of behavior change and instrumental goals. 
Receiving  and  providing  social  support  motivated  them  to 
collect  data  consistently,  and  it  sometimes  motivated  them 
to integrate data from multiple tracking tools. 

Accountability: Tracking to keep one and others accountable  
Participants  frequently  said  that  Instagram  supported  their 
health  goals  by  giving  them  a  sense  of  accountability. 
Social  accountability  refers  to  sharing  one’s  progress  to 
support  their  continued  pursuit  of  their  health  goals  [35]. 
Participants  described  collecting  and  integrating  data  on 
Instagram to stay accountable to themselves and others. 

Participants  felt  that  sharing  their  food  photos  and  having 
people follow their posts helped them remain accountable for 
their tracking and health goals. For this reason, participants 
described feeling a need to honestly record everything: “I’d 
post  everything  even  if  that's  not  super  healthy”  (I06).  I07 
would  sometimes  ‘cheat’  on  MyFitnessPal  by  leaving  out 
small treats, but would post everything on Instagram, which 
held  her  accountable  to  her  goal:  “before  [when  using 
MyFitnessPal] I would have a small snack pack that was a 
bag  of  chips  and  be  like,  ‘Oh,  that  doesn't  really  count 
because it's just a little tiny bag.’ But I think with Instagram, 
it helped me because I was taking a picture of it - It's real 
and  it  exists  and  it  does  count  towards  what  I  was  eating. 
And  then  putting  a  visual  image  of  it  up  really  helped  me 
stay  honest.”  This  accountability  is  important  because 
missing entries commonly results in abandonment [17]. 

Emotional Support: Sharing tracked data for support 
Participants  posted  and  shared  what  they  ate  to  receive 
emotional  support.  By  finding  others  interested  in  similar 
diet  options,  having  the  same  goals,  or  going  through  the 
same  weight  loss  processes,  many  participants  felt  better 
supported  by  Instagram  than  by  their  friends  and  families: 
“It makes me feel like I'm then around other people that feel 
the  same,  that  have  the  same  goals  as  me,  and  it  can 
support  me  in  that;  whereas  I  don't  particularly  have  that 
with  my  friends  and  family  just  because  they're  not 
particularly interested anymore” (I09). 

Participants  often  posted  particularly  difficult  moments, 
hoping to receive emotional support. Participants generally 
perceived Instagram users as being open about sharing bad 
days  and  encouraging 
to  each  other:  “people  are 
acknowledging  that  I’m  trying”  (I02)  and  “there  were 
people rooting for me.” (I15). Sharing failures (i.e., behaviors 
conflicting  with  the  individual’s  health  goals)  helped  them 
get  the  emotional  support  they  needed  to  accept  their 
failures  and  move  on.  I15  described  a  motivational  quote 
she posted when she had a bad day: “Some of my followers, 
and people who I follow as well, commented and wished me 
well and sent me love. It didn't make my day any better but 
it did make me feel better about everything.” 

Social Computing and HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA1678Participants  also  used  captions  to  attract  support  from 
others  by  helping  others  relate  to  their  experience.  Over 
time,  I01  found  that  adding  more  personal  messages  in 
captions  helps  her  to  get  more  reactions  from  followers: 
“To be a little less objective, a little more personal, to share 
more of what I'm feeling versus just stating [in the caption]. 
…  I  find  that  people  respond  better  to  that.  People  will 
comment more. It almost feels as if they're encouraging me 
because people want to support each other.” 

Participants strove to make the photos they posted visually 
appealing  because  they  felt  that  more  attractive  photos  get 
more  attention  from  other  Instagram  users.  This  attention 
helped  increase  their  motivation  for  posting  and  sharing: 
“I notice  that  when  I  had  something  that  looked  tasty  and 
healthy, I would get more people liking the photo… I think I 
really  used  that  as  motivation  too”  (I07).  Participants  had 
various  strategies  for  taking  proper  food  photos.  They 
would  adjust  layout  and  lighting  or  use  various  filters  or 
third-party  apps.  These  strategies  sometimes  affected  their 
food  choices:  “[I  started  to  make  and  eat  more  vegetarian 
food] because I think a lot of vegetarian food and vegan food 
that I make has a lot of green stuff in it and it's very attractive 
to people” (I05). Participants also considered timing of posts 
strategically to get social interactions from other users: “I've 
kind  of  figured  out  certain  times  during  the  day  that  more 
people seem to be active on Instagram” (I03). 

Motivation: Tracking to motivate oneself and others 
Participants posted about accomplishments and experiences 
to motivate themselves and others. Some participants posted 
accomplishments, such as reaching weight or fitness goals. 
For  example,  I06  posted  a  day  when  she  reached  a  large 
number of steps: “I had a really good day, and I had gotten 
16,000  or  more  steps,  then  I  feel  like  I  want  to  share  my 
progress and everything with everyone.” (I06).  

Others posted on Instagram to provide motivation to others. 
I06  thought  that  “show[ing]  others  what  I  was  going 
through  and  eating  and  everything  would  help  inspire  and 
motivate  them.”  I15  mentioned  that  she  kept  posting  her 
food  even  after  she  reached  her  goal  weight  because  she 
wanted  to  become  a  “source  of  motivation  and  inspiration 
for  people;”  she  thought  that  continuing  to  share  her 
previous and current habits would help encourage others.  

Information: Posting to share information and ideas 
Participants  also  commonly  posted  what  they  eat  on 
Instagram  to  share  knowledge  about  and  ideas  for  healthy 
eating  to  others.  For  example,  I01  wanted  to  convey  that 
dieting  does  not  require  giving  up  flavorful  food:  “I  just 
wanted  to  show  people  that  you  can  eat  food  that  tastes 
good  and  still  meets  it.  It  has  all  the  protein  and  the 
carbohydrates  and  the  healthy  fats,  I  still  hit  within  the 
caloric  range  that  I'm  aiming  for,  but  it  tastes  good.  It 
doesn't feel like I'm eating broccoli and chicken” (I01). 

To  make  food  posts  useful  for  others,  participants 
supplemented  food  photos  with  informative comments  and 

hashtags.  Many  participants  included  recipes  and  food 
preparation information in their posts. Since it is difficult to 
include  URLs  in  comments  on  Instagram,  participants 
posted  full  recipes  inside  the  comment  instead.  Some  used 
hashtags  to  represent  the  ingredients  to  make  it  easier  for 
others  to  search  for  the  recipe:  “If  I  used  a  particular 
ingredient  or  method,  I  would  sometimes  use  that  as  a 
hashtag.  An  example  of  that  is,  you  can  make  kind  of  fake 
spaghetti  noodles  out  of  zucchini  using  a  spiralizer  and 
they're  called  zoodles,  so  I  would  use  the  hashtag  for 
zoodles if I made something with that” (I13). 

Some  participants  integrated  information  from  other  tools 
into their food posts to provide more details. I11 shared her 
Instagram  posts  on  Tumblr,  where  she  could  include  more 
details, and provided the Tumblr link in her Instagram profile: 
“If  I  post  a  picture  on  Instagram  and  then  they  go  to  the 
blog to see the entire recipe then they can actually click on 
the links.” I06 would calculate Smart Points and add that to 
her photos: “It helps because a lot of people that might be 
using  Weight  Watchers  usually  are  saying  like  how  many 
Smart  Points  is  in  whatever  they  are  eating.  …That  helps 
when you see people posting stuff like that so then you can 
kind  of  get  ideas  on  what  to  eat.”  Others  also  often 
manually  incorporated  caloric  information  in  their  text 
descriptions,  hashtags  (e.g.,  #200calories),  or  photos  using 
photo-editing  tools  to  help  others  and  themselves  reflect 
and search for previously cooked foods based on calories. 

Participants  also  considered  what  post  content  and  timings 
would  be  most  appropriate  and  useful  for  their  followers. 
For example, I01 would deliberately make variations of the 
same food or perform easier workouts so others can follow 
more  easily.  I11  once  wanted  to  share  a  coffee  with 
sugar-free  syrup,  but  decided  to  post  at  a  time  when  the 
content  would  be  more  appropriate  for  her  followers: 
“I took the picture and then I was like, ‘Is it good to post a 
picture with coffee at 10:00 in the evening UK?’” 

Reflection 
Participants often reflected on their decisions of eating and 
tracking  by  reading  their  old  posts  and  by  reading  and 
commenting on other people’s posts. The lived informatics 
model suggests that people who track to change their behavior 
usually  review  their  data  more  often  than  instrumental 
trackers. Our participants saw reflection as a way to receive 
and  provide  social  support,  and  thus  were  motivated  to 
reflect on their data and that of others. 

Accountability: Reflecting on old posts to stay accountable  
Participants  maintained  accountability  by  reviewing  and 
reflecting  on  what  they  had  done  in  the  past.  Participants 
found that looking back at their posts made them aware of 
how  well  they  were  maintaining  their  desired  diet  and 
helped  keep  them  accountable.  One  participant  noted  how 
much  she  had  eaten  out  in  the  past  week  and  decided  to 
cook more meals at home: “if I've posted a lot of pictures of 
food  from  restaurants,  it  also  kind  of  tells  me,  ‘Hey,  you 
haven't  had  anything  that's  been  homemade  in  a  while. 

Social Computing and HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA1679You've  been  eating  out  a  lot.  Maybe  you  should  make  a 
salad  for  yourself.’”  (I03).  Another  participant  decided  to 
pack her lunches at night after noticing she was eating out 
too  much:  “One  trend  that  I've  noticed  is  that  I  definitely 
need to take the time to pack a lunch at night before work 
because if I don't … I'm going to eat a burrito ... I'll take a 
photo with a burrito in my hand in the car. It's helpful for 
me to see that and look back at the different days” (I13). 

Participants  also  checked  other  people’s  posts  to  keep 
others  accountable  to  their  goals.  I08  mentioned  she 
checked  in  with  other  women  participating  in  the  same 
healthy  eating  challenge  to  make  sure  they  are  making 
progress:  “We  are  finishing  up  day  2  of  this  one  perfect 
week so I'm just checking in, seeing how they are doing and 
asking how their day went. This is also a photo to show like, 
‘Oh, this is what I had for dinner.’ I tagged them and then 
asked for them to tag me in any of their photos.” 

Emotional Support: Reading and commenting for support 
Participants read comments from other people and reviewed 
the  ‘likes’  their  posts  received  to  gain  emotional  support. 
I01  described  what  kind  of  feedback  she  got  and  how  she 
was  encouraged:  “People  will  send  a  combination  of 
emoticons in kind of encouragement. You'll see people that 
say  ‘nice’,  or  ‘good  job’,  ‘keep  it  up’.  You'll  have  like 
clapping hands, you'll have smiley faces or thumbs up kind 
of thing. It's really fun to have that kind of nice little, even 
emoji feedbacks, it's super positive for me.” 

Participants also felt that giving emotional support back to 
the community was important. To provide this support, they 
proactively looked for other people’s posts to comment on. 
They commented on posts by their usual followers, people 
they  follow,  and  people  who  use  the  same  hashtags: 
“I'll still  go  to  these  certain  hashtags  and  scroll  through 
and comment and encourage other people on some posts if 
they  need  encouragement  or  anything  like  that  …  not  just 
‘like’  other  pictures  just  to  get  my  Instagram  handle  out 
there but to actually add to the community” (I14). 

Motivation: Reading and commenting for motivation 
Participants  found  looking  back  at  their  feed  motivating, 
particularly  during  weeks  when  they  were  not  performing 
as well towards their goal: “I felt like I'm stuck, and I wasn't 
losing weight or anything. I had a bad couple of weeks, so I 
wanted  to  go  back  and  see  what  was  I  eating  a  few  weeks 
ago where I was feeling really good and doing good just to 
refresh my mind and re-motivate myself” (I06). 

Seeing  posts  from  other  people  was  also  inspiring  and 
motivating. Many participants, such as I12, described being 
motivated  by  seeing  what  others  do:  “There's  this  picture 
[another Instagram user] posted today: ‘Look at me doing 
tuck  jumps.  I  couldn’t  do  tuck  jumps  when  I  started.’  It 
probably would have killed her. She can do it and I see her 
… It's like, ‘I guess I can do it.’” 

People  also  found  motivation  by  motivating  others.  I03 
described how she commented on posts from other women 

struggling  with  eating  disorder  recovery:  “I  want  to 
motivate those other girls that are struggling to say,  ‘Hey, 
I'm  in  recovery,  too,  and  look  what  I'm  eating.’  Like,  I've 
had to go over the same kind of fears, of different fear-foods 
and stuff. I kind of use it as more of a motivation.” 

Information: Reviewing posts for inspiration and information  
To help make day-to-day decisions that support their health 
goals  and  to  find  inspiration,  participants  often  looked  for 
ideas  and  information  in  their  old  posts.  Participants 
browsed old posts to find ideas about what to eat or make: 
“if  I'm  wondering  what  I  should  make  for  the  week,  I  like 
looking  through  my  posts  to  see  other  things  I  cooked 
before”  (I07).  This  reflection  was  particularly  useful  when 
they  wanted  to  replicate  previous  successes:  “when  I  hit  a 
plateau,  going  back  and  seeing,  ‘Oh,  I  remember  that  that 
week there was a sudden loss. Let's go and see exactly what 
I ate.’ It's very easy to track and replicate” (I11). 

Reviewing  other  people’s  food  posts  also  helped  our 
participants obtain ideas and knowledge about food, which 
was  useful  to  sustain  their  eating  behavior  change.  As  I06 
described, new ideas kept her motivated about maintaining 
her diet goal: “if I get kind of bored with stuff I’m eating, I 
can  kind  of  look  and  see  maybe  what  other  people  are 
eating to give me some of the ideas. “ 

Lapsing and Resuming Tracking 
The lived informatics model categorizes four types of lapsing: 
forgetting, upkeep, skipping, and suspending. Our participants 
did not report lapsing because of forgetting or upkeep. They 
did  sometimes  intentionally  skip  or  suspend  tracking  for 
reasons  related  to  themselves  and  others.  They  often 
received social support when they lapsed. 

Accountability: Lapsing when accountability needs change 
Participants often lapsed when their goals shifted and caused 
their  accountability  needs  to  change.  Some  participants 
were  rigorous  about  tracking  when  they  were  trying  to 
change their behavior but relaxed when they were satisfied 
with  it  (I03,  I04,  I07).  I03  described  how  her  level  of 
tracking  loosened  when  she  reached  a  goal:  “I’m  on  a 
vacation,  then  I  eat  out  ...  Suddenly  I  come  back  on 
Monday.  I  eat  at  home  the  whole  time  because  I  have  to 
make  up  for  eating  out.  ‘I’m  going  to  keep  track  until 
Friday,’  and  then  I’m  like,  ‘Okay,  so  now  I’m  back  on 
track, so I don’t have to keep tracking anymore.’” 

Other  participants  lapsed  because  they  wanted  to  help 
others  keep  accountable  to  their  goals  and  worried  that 
certain  posts  could  negatively  affect  the  behavior  of  their 
followers. I13 decided that she would not post certain food 
photos that could cause negative behavior in others: “I just 
don't  want  to  post  too  many  potentially  triggering  photos 
because they have no way of opting out of seeing them.” 

The goal of accountability was also sometimes at odds with 
impression management, and participants sometimes lapsed 
to  preserve  their  image.  For  example,  some  were  reluctant 
to  post  food  perceived  as  undesirable,  and  I04  worried 

Social Computing and HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA1680about  her  parents  seeing  posts  that  showed  her  drinking: 
“If I  take  pictures  of  something  that  I've  been  drinking,  I 
don't  share  it  with  my  parents  because  they  don't  like  me 
drinking ... that's to share with friends” (I04). 

Alternatively,  some  participants  felt  uncomfortable  lapsing 
because  of  their  perceived  accountability  to  others.  They 
felt the need to explain their behavior because they did not 
want to disappoint others. I09 described one instance when 
she  went  traveling  and  did  not  have  a  reliable  internet 
connection  for  three  days.  Concerned  that  her  followers 
were  waiting  for  her  posts,  she  explained  her  connectivity 
issues  to  her  followers  in  her  first  post  after  her  return. 
I11 similarly felt that her followers were “looking at [her] 
as 
this  perceived 
accountability, she felt she needed to justify actions that did 
not befit a role model: “why I’ve eaten bad that day.” 

the  UK  keto  guide”.  Because  of 

Emotional Support: Lapsing triggered additional support 
Participants  mentioned  that  their  lapses  sometimes  lead  to 
additional emotional support from others, which could help 
them  resume  tracking.  After  being  sick  and  not  posting  on 
Instagram  for  a  while,  I12  found  others  left  encouraging 
comments  when  she  resumed  posting:  “The  girls  are  like, 
‘Yeah,  see  that’s  good.  You're  still  eating  healthy.  At  least 
you're  doing  it.’”  Some  participants  even  received  in-app 
messages from others when they had not posted for a while 
(I06, I10, I12): “I had someone message me, and I had no 
idea who it was, and she had like commented in some of my 
pictures,  and  she  messaged  me  to  see  me  if  I'm  okay 
because I hadn't posted anything in a couple of days, and I 
was like ‘Wow.’ I'm like ‘Thanks.’ ... it made me feel good 
and kind of got me motivated that like someone that I don't 
even  know  takes  the  time  to  send  me  a  message  to  make 
sure  everything  was  okay”  (I06).  These  comments  and 
messages  made  participants  feel  they  were  cared  for  and 
supported, with messages helping them go through difficult 
time and resume their everyday tracking activities. 

Information: Lapsing when photos lacked useful information 
Participants  whose  primary  goal  on  Instagram  was  to 
provide  knowledge  to  others  were  more  selective  about 
their posts, intentionally posting about food or workouts to 
be  informative  rather  than  posting  all  the  food  they  ate  or 
exercises  they  did  (I04,  I11,  I15).  For  example,  I04  only 
shared food she had not previously posted because she did 
not think reposting the same food would be useful for other 
people:  “I  will  post  maybe  once  a  week  or  twice  a  week. 
Then  I  won't  repeat  my  posts.  I  wouldn't  post  something 
that I already posted ... I post something that's interesting.” 

DISCUSSION 
People  track  their  food  on  Instagram  with  the  intertwined 
goals  of  supporting  healthy  eating  and  providing  and 
receiving  social  support.  The  lived  informatics  model  and 
other  personal  informatics  models  may  be  strengthened  by 
the  inclusion  of  social  interaction  and  other  social  roles  in 
the model. As seen among our participants, use of Instagram 
for food journaling can support both health and social goals, 

but  this  use  requires  people  to  make  tradeoffs  between 
consistent  tracking  and  social  needs.  Designs  can  better 
support people in making these decisions. 

Including Social Roles in Personal Informatics Models 
Our findings show that people’s interactions with others can 
tracking  behaviors.  Prior  research 
influence  personal 
established that others, such as health care providers [12,35] 
or family members [25,50], influence people’s tracking and 
health  decisions  and  can  help  them  maintain  their  health. 
Involvement of others can offer accountability and guidance 
on how to track as well as how to interpret and act on tracked 
data. Although the importance of others in health behaviors 
and  in  self-tracking  decisions  is  well-established,  the 
models  the  HCI  community  uses  to  understand  and  design 
for self-tracking tools [21,29] still focus on the individual. 

Our  study  of  Instagram  for  food  tracking  offers  an  in-depth 
understanding  of  the  many  ways  others  can  influence 
tracking  decisions  and  related  behaviors.  Participants  chose 
to use Instagram in their food tracking for many of the same 
reasons people share health information in other forums: to 
receive  accountability,  motivation,  emotional  support,  and 
information  from  others.  But  they  also  chose  to  use,  or 
continue  using,  Instagram  for  their  food  tracking  so  they 
could offer this social support to others. 

This  motivation  carried  through  to  the  collection  stage  of 
tracking. Our participants created and curated posts to make 
them  desirable,  motivating,  inspirational,  and  informative 
for themselves and others. Our participants also reflected on 
data collected both by themselves and others, which differs 
from  the  emphasis  of  personal  informatics  on  reflecting 
primarily  on  one’s  own  data.  Prior  work  has  demonstrated 
that  reflecting  on  family  member’s  tracking  data  [50]  and 
receiving  prompts  from  health  experts  [35]  can  address 
challenges that arise in reflection.  

The desire to pursue or provide social support can also have 
negative  consequences,  triggering  lapsing  and  resumption 
in  tracking.  For  example,  only  posting  informative  photos 
can  leave  tracking  data  incomplete  for  later  reflection  on 
behavior  change  goals.  However,  people  might  have  other 
goals for reflection, and some recent studies (e.g., [19]) have 
begun  to  examine  how  to  make  incomplete  tracking  data 
useful  to  support  such  reflection.  By  understanding  why 
people  lapse  and  resume,  and  how  these  reasons  conflict 
with  their  goals  for  reflection,  systems  can  also  make 
people  aware  of  these  decisions.  Systems  can  also  help 
people  make 
that  accommodate 
tradeoffs  between  social  needs  and  reflection,  such  as  the 
frequency or the type of posts.  

informed  decisions 

Updating  personal  informatics  models  to  more  explicitly 
help  designers  and  researchers  consider  the  different  roles 
and influences people may have in self-tracking could lead 
to  new  design  opportunities.  Below,  we  discuss  some  of 
those opportunities in the food tracking domain.  

Social Computing and HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA1681Using Hashtags to Reveal Myriad Communities 
Previous  work  has  suggested  that  hashtags  can  induce  a 
sense  of  ad  hoc  community  [3].  Our  findings  suggest  that 
this  function  of  hashtags  was  an  important  reason  users 
select  Instagram  for  food  tracking.  The  ability  to  use 
multiple hashtags allowed users to easily find similar others 
and to discover and enter new communities. This exposure 
to new communities helped them find ideas for new exercise 
and  diet  options  (e.g.,  new  ingredient  options  to  try)  and 
develop their own recipes or exercise regimen.   

Prior  work  in  online  communities  [3,31,43]  and  health 
tracking [14,52] has shown the value of social support from 
similar  others.  Most  online  communities  and  social  media 
platforms also provide features to support people in finding 
others  with  the  same  interests  or  goals,  such  as  discussion 
boards with specific topics, Facebook groups, or subreddits. 
However, commenters with different conditions or illnesses 
can  still  share  related  experiences  and  provide  emotional 
support [28]. Similarly, strangers on online communities can 
also  provide  accountability  and  information  support  [43]. 
Our findings confirm that both similar others and people who 
are  quite  different  can  provide  support.  Our  participants 
were  inspired  by  users  who  shared  similar  healthy  eating 
goals  but  whose  lives  were  quite  different  from  their  own 
(e.g.,  students  vs.  stay-at-home  moms).  They  could  also 
explore  new  ingredients  that  are  different  from  their  usual 
choices, but still within their diet restrictions or preferences 
(e.g., fresh food vs. artificial food substitutes). 

However,  in  Instagram's  current  form,  user  discovery  of 
new hashtags depends on serendipity. To better support this 
type  of  exploration,  systems  can  show  users  commonly 
co-occurring hashtags. Systems can also help users navigate 
through  different  communities  whose  norms  they  are  not 
familiar with by exposing in-group norms [9] and exposing 
information that is desirable across different communities. 

Managing Tensions between Goals and Social Needs 
Using Instagram both for tracking one's own health behaviors 
and for engaging others creates a tension between personal 
tracking  goals  and  social  goals.  This  tension  can  cause 
people to adjust their behaviors to reconcile the two goals. 
Sometimes this adjustment leads to behaviors that are both 
better  for  the  user's  health  and  more  engaging  for  others, 
but  sometimes  people  prioritize  one  goal  over  the  other, 
even to the detriment of their own health behaviors. 

Tracking change when supporting social needs 
Membership  in  the  Instagram  community  influenced  how 
our participants collected information. Previous research has 
also found that participants wanted to post interesting rather 
than  routine  content  [41,43],  including  photos  [5].  Findings 
in other online communities [43] and family journaling [25] 
also  show  that  people  strove  to  engage  and  inform  their 
audience  with  the  content  they  posted,  even  when  this 
conflicted with personal goals.  

Our  findings  emphasize  an  underlying  conflict  in  this 
preference:  the  desire  to  keep  an  Instagram  feed  interesting 
and engaging poses a challenge to users who want to record 
their  day-to-day  meals.  Because  of  this  conflict,  all  but  two 
participants created separate accounts to prevent over-sharing. 
To maintain an interesting feed, some participants also lapsed 
in tracking, which in turn limited their ability to review and 
reflect  on  past  behavior,  such  as  preventing  people  from 
identifying  personal  antecedents  of  a  negative  outcome 
(e.g., undesired  weight  gain).  One  design  opportunity  could 
be  to  support  different  content  lifespan  for  sharing  and 
reflection.  For  example,  systems  could  support  ephemeral 
sharing, similar to Instagram Stories, to fulfill people’s social 
needs  while  maintaining  the  content  privately  for  future 
tracking  systems  should  also 
reflection.  Designers  of 
consider supporting reflection according to what people try to 
learn  from  their  or  other  people’s  behavior.  For  example, 
when  people  seek  inspiration  from  past  behavior,  systems 
could  highlight  weeks  when  the  user  ate  healthy  or 
diversified  meals,  even  given  an  incomplete  record.  When 
reflecting to understand personal behavior, the system could 
highlight the weeks most representative of food patterns and 
emphasize when the data might be incomplete. 

Behavior change when supporting social needs  
The  conflict  between  Instagram  norms  and  someone’s 
personal health goals also affects user behaviors, in positive 
and negative ways. In some cases, social norms influenced 
participants  to  act  in  ways  more  consistent  with  their  own 
health  goals.  For  instance,  some  participants  mentioned 
eating  fewer  snacks  (I12),  more  vegetables  (I03,  I05),  or 
more  diverse  food  (I10,  I15)  because  they  did  not  want  to 
disappoint their followers and wanted to stay accountable to 
them. Their healthy behavior choices were often reinforced 
by  reading  other  people’s  posts  to  learn  healthy  eating 
strategies  and  by  receiving  feedback  from  followers. 
Similar  to  Community  Mosaic  users,  our  participants  also 
made healthier choices so they would not have and then share 
experiences that might negatively influence others [44]. 

However,  in  other  cases  social  pressure  made  participants 
less  likely  to  engage  in  healthy  behaviors:  I01  swam  less 
frequently  because  the  workout  was  less  accessible  to  her 
followers.  Increases  in  negative  behaviors  and  outcomes 
have  occurred  in  other  Instagram  communities,  such  as 
depression  in  eating  disorder  recovery  communities  [7]. 
Content can also influence people who run across the posts 
but are not part of the community, such as people who find 
pro-anorexia  content  by 
fitness  or 
health-related  hashtags  [45].  As  suggested  by  research  on 
depression  online  [10],  designers  or  facilitators  of  online 
communities  should  consider  creating  awareness  by 
proposing  community  norms  for  positive  behavior.  Systems 
can  promote  this  awareness  by  supporting  people  to  reflect 
on their long-term trend in relation to a community’s overall 
behavior. Systems can also involve health experts to moderate 
negative  posts  or  promote  educational  material  to  increase 
awareness of positive behavior. 

searching 

for 

Social Computing and HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA1682Appropriating Multiple Tools for Social Personal Tracking  
Munson  et  al.  [39]  describe  how  repurposing  social  media 
platforms  for  health  can  be  a  first-order  approximation  —a 
“tractable  solution  that  partially  solves  specific  problems 
with  known  trade-offs”  [1]—  that  can  help  individuals 
attempting to manage different aspects of their health. Using 
Instagram as a social, photo-based food journal, is one such 
approximation:  it  provides  features  to  support  food  photo 
collection,  reflection  on  old  posts,  and  finding  community 
support.  Instagram  was  not  designed  for  personal  tracking, 
and does not include common self-tracking features, such as 
summaries designed to support reflection. As Instagram was 
not  designed  to  support  a  focus  on  healthy  eating,  it  also 
lacks  features  to  support  recording  or  sharing  detailed  food 
information  or  recipes.  The  lack  of  these  features  might  be 
challenging for people who seek to appropriate Instagram as 
a personal food tracking system. 

However,  our  findings  suggest  that  participants  with  varied 
health goals could appropriate Instagram’s features to fit with 
their needs. Some participants would glance chronologically 
through  the  color  and  content  of  food  photos  to  find  trends 
and awareness. Others felt more engaged with their tracking 
without  entering  all  the  details.  Some  of  Instagram's 
flexibility  derives  from  it  not  being  designed  for  food 
tracking,  and  so  it  does  not  impose  a  designer’s  notion  of 
how people should track food. This allows people to use the 
photos and text fields as needed to meet their goals. 

People  also  use  Instagram  alongside  other  tools  to  support 
particular  tracking  needs,  such  as  I15  who  used  YouFood 
for  detailed  food  tracking  while  also  posting  photos  to 
Instagram for social support. I05 also use Instagram photos 
as  a  reminder  of  what  she  had  eaten  for  the  day  and  then 
used MyFitnessPal for calorie counting. While participants 
often  found  tracking  different  information  using  several 
apps  useful,  they  also  discussed  a  need  to  integrate 
information  from  several  sources  to  help  them  reflect  on 
their  holistic  health  goals.  Helping  users  easily  integrate 
additional  information  with  the  right  level  of  detail  into 
their  food  posts  could  support  their  reflection  on  their 
behaviors  in  more  detail.  Future  systems  should  also 
consider  allowing  importing  and  exporting  data  from 
different tools with customized levels of disclosure. In this 
way, users can select tools that best fit their needs. 

LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
We searched for users using #fooddiary or #foodjournal at 
various times of day to recruit participants across different 
time zones who were posting food photos at different times 
of  day.  However,  we  only  encountered  one  male  in  over 
200  Instagram  users  we  contacted,  who  did  not  respond  to 
our  interview  invitation.  We  specifically  looked  for  males 
in snowball sampling. Participants also commented on male 
scarcity. As a result, participants were all female and 18 to 
34  years  old,  leaving  us  unable  to  describe  experiences  of 
Instagram users more broadly.  

We  were  also  only  able  to  recruit  participants  who  were 
actively using Instagram to support healthy eating behavior, 
because hashtag searching on Instagram only shows results 
from the most current hashtag use. Therefore, although our 
study  includes  participants  who  had  previously  lapsed,  it 
does not describe the experiences of people who abandoned 
food tracking on Instagram. 

While we strove to understand a range of uses and experiences, 
including participants with varied numbers of followers and in 
different stages of pursuing healthy eating, we did not collect 
socioeconomic  status  (e.g.,  education  or  income).  Future 
research should examine the experiences of people of diverse 
socioeconomic status. In addition, while our participants had 
diverse goals and follower counts, our sample size was small. 
Future,  larger-scale  research  is  needed  to  provide  nuanced 
insight into differences between user groups. 

CONCLUSION 
Building  on  prior  knowledge  of  how  people  appropriate 
social  media  for  the  pursuit  of  health  goals,  we  describe 
lived  experiences  of  personal  food  tracking  in  a  social 
environment.  We  use  the  lived  informatics  model  to 
describe  how  people’s  tracking  activities  were  shaped  by 
their  intent  to  receive  and  provide  social  support  on 
Instagram.  Goals  of  managing  one’s  impression,  receiving 
and providing social benefits, and keeping track of behavior 
are intertwined and influence each other.  

Designers  wanting  to  support  personal  tracking  in  social 
contexts  should  consider  features  that  help  users  pursue 
social benefits. For example, systems can help users access 
communities 
for  specific  health  goals  and  diverse 
exploration  as  well  as  providing  strategies  to  navigate 
through  different  communities.  Also,  systems  can  support 
users in integrating information from different apps that are 
better fit to various aspects of their health goals. 

For personal informatics researchers, the personal informatics 
models  should  be  further  developed  to  account  for  social 
influence.  Researchers  should  reflect  on  how  social  needs 
affect  people’s  decisions  about  and  behavior  surrounding 
the  acts  of  selecting  tools,  collecting,  integrating,  and 
reflecting on data, and lapsing and resuming.  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank Laura Pina, Daniel Epstein, Lucas Colusso, Arpita 
Bhattacharya,  and  reviewers  for  thoughtful  feedback  on  the 
earlier version of this paper. This study is funded in part by 
the  National  Science  Foundation  under  awards  IIS-1553167 
and SCH-1344613, the Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality  under  award  1R21HS023654,  a  University  of 
Washington Innovation Research Award, and Microsoft. 

Social Computing and HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA1683 
 
REFERENCES  
1.  Mark Ackerman. 2009. The Intellectual Challenge of 
CSCW: The Gap Between Social Requirements and 
Technical Feasibility. International Journal of Human 
Computer interaction 24, July 2014: 37–41. 
http://doi.org/10.1207/S15327051HCI1523 

2.  Phil Adams, Eric PS Baumer, and Geri Gay. 2014. 

Staccato Social Support in Mobile Health Applications. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2014): 653–662. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557297 

3.  Nazanin Andalibi, Pinar Ozturk, and Andrea Forte. Sensitive 

Self-disclosures, Responses, and Social Support on Instagram: 
the Case of #Depression. Proceedings of the ACM Conference 
on Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW 2017). 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2998181.2998243 

4.  Lenore Arab, Deborah Estrin, Donnie H Kim, Jeff Burke, 

and Jeff Goldman. 2011. Feasibility Testing of an 
Automated Image-Capture Method to Aid Dietary Recall. 
European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 65, 10: 1156–1162.  
http://doi.org/10.1038/ejcn.2011.75 

5.  Eric PS Baumer, Sherri J Katz, Jill E Freeman, Phil 

Adams, Amy L Gonzales, John Pollak, Daniela Retelny, 
Jeff Niederdeppe, Christine M Olson, and Geri K Gay. 
2012. Prescriptive Persuasion and Open-Ended Social 
Awareness: Expanding the Design Space of Mobile Health. 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW 2012): 475–484.  
http://doi.org/10.1145/2145204.2145279 

6.  G Bird and P C Elwood. 1983. The Dietary Intakes of 

Subjects Estimated From Photographs Compared with a 
Weighed Record. Human nutrition. Applied nutrition 37, 6: 
470–473. http://europepmc.org/abstract/MED/6662734 

7.  Stevie Chancellor, Zhiyuan Lin, Erica L Goodman, 

Stephanie Zerwas, and Munmun De Choudhury. 2016. 
Quantifying and Predicting Mental Illness Severity in 
Online Pro-Eating Disorder Communities. Proceedings of 
the ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative 
Work and Social Computing (CSCW 2016): 1171–1184.  
http://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819973 

8.  Stevie Chancellor, Tanushree Mitra, and Munmun De 
Choudhury. 2016. Recovery Amid Pro-Anorexia: 
Analysis of Recovery in Social Media. Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems (CHI 2016): 2111–2123. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858246 

9.  Stevie Chancellor, Jessica Annette Pater, Trustin Clear, Eric 
Gilbert, and Munmun De Choudhury. 2016. # thyghgapp: 
Instagram Content Moderation and Lexical Variation in Pro-
Eating Disorder Communities. Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & 
Social Computing (CSCW 2016): 1201–1213. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819963 

10. Munmun De Choudhury, Emre Kiciman, Mark Dredze, 

Glen Coppersmith, and Mrinal Kumar. 2016. 
Discovering Shifts to Suicidal Ideation from Mental 
Health Content in Social Media. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI 2016): 2098–2110. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858207 

11. Munmun De Choudhury, Sanket Sharma, and Emre 
Kiciman. 2016. Characterizing Dietary Choices, 
Nutrition, and Language in Food Deserts via Social 
Media. Proceedings of the ACM Conference on 
Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing (CSCW 2016): 1157–1170. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819956 

12. Chia-Fang Chung, Kristin Dew, Allison Cole, Jasmine 

Zia, James Fogarty, Julie A Kientz, and Sean A 
Munson. 2016. Boundary Negotiating Artifacts in 
Personal Informatics: Patient-Provider Collaboration 
with Patient-Generated Data. Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work 
& Social Computing (CSCW 2016): 770–786. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2819926 

13. Andrea Civan-Hartzler, David W McDonald, Chris 

Powell, Meredith M Skeels, Marlee Mukai, and Wanda 
Pratt. 2010. Bringing the Field into Focus: User-
centered Design of a Patient Expertise Locator. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2010): 1675–1684. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753577 

14. Sunny Consolvo, Katherine Everitt, Ian Smith, and 
James A Landay. 2006. Design Requirements for 
Technologies that Encourage Physical Activity. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2006): 457–466. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1124772.1124840 

15. Sunny Consolvo, Predrag Klasnja, David W McDonald, and 
James A Landay. 2012. Designing for Healthy Lifestyles: 
Design Considerations for Mobile Technologies to Encourage 
Consumer Health and Wellness. Foundations and Trends in 
Human–Computer Interaction 6, 3–4: 167–315. 
http://doi.org/10.1561/1100000040 

16. Felicia Cordeiro, Elizabeth Bales, Erin Cherry, and James 
Fogarty. 2015. Rethinking the Mobile Food Journal. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (CHI 2015): 3207–3216.  
http://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702154 

17. Felicia Cordeiro, Daniel A Epstein, Edison Thomaz, 

Cordeiro, Elizabeth Bales, Arvind K Jagannathan, Gregory 
D Abowd, and James Fogarty. 2015. Barriers and Negative 
Nudges: Exploring Challenges in Food Journaling. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (CHI 2015): 1159–1162.  
http://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702155 

Social Computing and HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA168418. Daniel A Epstein, Bradley H Jacobson, Elizabeth Bales, 
David W McDonald, and Sean A Munson. 2015. From 
“nobody cares” to “way to go!”: A Design Framework for 
Social Sharing in Personal Informatics. Proceedings of the 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work & Social Computing (CSCW 2015): 1622–1636. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675135 

19. Daniel A Epstein, Jennifer H Kang, Laura R Pina, James 
Fogarty, and Sean A Munson. 2016. Reconsidering the 
Device in the Drawer: Lapses as a Design Opportunity 
in Personal Informatics. Proceedings of the 2016 ACM 
International Joint Conference on Pervasive and 
Ubiquitous Computing (UbiComp 2016): 829–840. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2971648.2971656 

20. Daniel A Epstein, Felicia Cordeiro, James Fogarty, 
Gary Hsieh, and Sean A Munson. 2016. Crumbs: 
Lightweight Daily Food Challenges to Promote 
Engagement and Mindfulness. Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI 2016): 5632–5644.  
http://doi.org/10.1145/2858036.2858044 

21. Daniel A Epstein, An Ping, James Fogarty, and Sean A 
Munson. 2015. A Lived Informatics Model of Personal 
Informatics. Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International 
Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous 
Computing (UbiComp 2015): 731–742. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804250 

22. Susannah Fox and M Duggan. 2013. Health online 2013. 

Health: 1–55. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/~/media/Files/Reports/PIP_
HealthOnline.pdf 

23. Andrea Grimes, Martin Bednar, Jay D Bolter, and 

Rebecca E Grinter. 2008. EatWell: Sharing Nutrition-
related Memories in a Low-income Community. 
Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW 2008): 87–96. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1460563.1460579 

24. Andrea Grimes and Richard Harper. 2008. Celebratory 

Technology : New Directions for Food Research in HCI. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2008): 467–476. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357130 

25. Andrea Grimes, Desney Tan, and Dan Morris. 2009. Toward 
Technologies that Support Family Reflections on Health. 
Proceedings of the ACM 2009 International Conference on 
Supporting Group Work (Group 2009): 311–320.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/1531674.1531721 

26. Andrea Hartzler and Wanda Pratt. 2011. Managing the 
Personal Side of Health: How Patient Expertise Differs 
From the Expertise of Clinicians. Journal of Medical 
Internet Research 13, 3. 
http://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.1728 

27. Jina Huh and Mark S Ackerman. 2012. Collaborative 
Help in Chronic Disease Management. Proceedings of 
the ACM conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW 2012): 853. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2145204.2145331 

28. Jina Huh, Leslie S Liu, Tina Neogi, Kori Inkpen, and 

Wanda Pratt. 2014. Health Vlogs as Social Support for 
Chronic Illness Management. ACM Transactions on 
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 21, 4: 23. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2630067 

29. Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2010. A Stage-
Based Model of Personal Informatics Systems. 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2010): 557–566. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1753326.1753409 

30. Ian Li, Anind Dey, and Jodi Forlizzi. 2011. 

Understanding My Data, Myself: Supporting Self-
Reflection with Ubicomp Technologies. Proceedings of 
the 13th International Conference on Ubiquitous 
computing (UbiComp 2011): 405–414. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2030112.2030166 

31. Victor Li, David W McDonald, Elizabeth V Eikey, Jessica 
Sweeney, Janessa Escajeda, Guarav Dubey, Kaitlin Riley, 
Erika S Poole, and Eric B Hekler. 2014. Losing it Online: 
Characterizing Participation in an Online Weight Loss 
Community. Proceedings of the 18th International 
Conference on Supporting Group Work (Group 2014): 35–45. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2660398.2660416 

32. James J Lin, Lena Mamykina, Silvia Lindtner, Gregory 
Delajoux, and Henry B Strub. 2006. Fish’n’Steps: 
Encouraging Physical Activity with an Interactive Computer 
Game. Proceedings of the 2006 International Conference on 
Ubiquitous computing (UbiComp 2006): 261–278.  
http://doi.org/10.1007/11853565_16 

33. Leslie S Liu, Jina Huh, Tina Neogi, Kori Inkpen, and Wanda 
Pratt. 2013. Health Vlogger-Viewer Interaction in Chronic 
Illness Management. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2013): 49–58.  
http://doi.org/10.1145/2470654.2470663 

34. Diane Maloney-Krichmar and Jenny Preece. 2005. A Multilevel 
Analysis of Sociability, Usability, and Community Dynamics in 
an Online Health Community. ACM Transactions on 
Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI) 12, 2: 201–232. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1067860.1067864 

35. Lena Mamykina, Elizabeth Mynatt, Patricia Davidson, and 
Daniel Greenblatt. 2008. MAHI: Investigation of Social 
Scaffolding for Reflective Thinking in Diabetes 
Management. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2008): 477–486.  
http://doi.org/10.1145/1357054.1357131 

Social Computing and HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA1685 
 
36. Yelena Mejova, Sofiane Abbar, and Hamed Haddadi. 
2016. Fetishizing Food in Digital Age: #foodporn 
Around the World. Tenth International AAAI 
Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM 2016). 

37. Hannah K Menefee, Morgan J Thompson, Thomas M 

Guterbock, Ishan C Williams, and Rupa S Valdez. 2016. 
Mechanisms of Communicating Health Information 
Through Facebook: Implications for Consumer Health 
Information Technology Design. Journal of Medical 
Internet Research 18, 8. 
http://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.5949 

38. Anders K Munk, Andreas Birkbak, and Morten K Petersen. 
2016. ( Re- ) Appropriating Instagram for Social Research: 
Three Methods for Studying Obesogenic Environments. 
Proceedings of the 7th 2016 International Conference on 
Social Media & Society: 19.  
https://doi.org/10.1145/2930971.2930991 

39. Sean A Munson, Hasan Cavusoglu, Larry Frisch, and 
Sidney Fels. 2013. Sociotechnical Challenges and 
Progress in Using Social Media for Health. Journal of 
Medical Internet Research 15, 10: 1–14. 
http://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.2792 

40. Sean A Munson, Erin Krupka, Caroline Richardson, and Paul 

45. Jessica Pater, Oliver Haimson, Nazanin Andalibi, and 
Elizabeth D Mynatt. 2016. “Hunger Hurts but Starving 
Works”: Characterzing the Presentation of Eating 
Disorders Online. Proceedings of the ACM Conference 
on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing (CSCW 2016): 1185-1200. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2818048.2820030 

46. Josée Poirier and Nathan K Cobb. 2012. Social Influence as 
a Driver of Engagement in a Web-based Health Intervention. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research 14, 1: 1–9.  
http://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.1957 

47. Instagram Press. 600 Million and Counting. 

http://blog.instagram.com/post/154506585127/161215-
600million 

48. Caroline R Richardson, Lorraine R Buis, Adrienne W. 
Janney, David E Goodrich, Ananda Sen, Michael L 
Hess, Kathleen S Mehari, Laurie A Fortlage1, Paul J 
Resnick, Brian J Zikmund-Fisher, Victor J Strecher,  
and John D Piette. An Online Community Improves 
Adherence in an Internet-Mediated Walking Program. 
Part 1: Results of a Randomized Controlled Trial. 
Journal of Medical Internet Research 12, 4: e41. 
http://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.1338 

Resnick. 2015. Effects of Public Commitments and 
Accountability in a Technology-Supported Physical Activity 
Intervention. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2015), 1135–1144.  
http://doi.org/10.1145/2702123.2702524 

49. John Rooksby, Mattias Rost, Alistair Morrison, and Matthew 
Chalmers Chalmers. 2014. Personal Tracking as Lived 
Informatics. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2014): 1163–1172.  
http://doi.org/10.1145/2556288.2557039 

41. Sean A Munson, Debra Lauterbach, Mark W Newman, 

and Paul Resnick. 2010. Happier Together: Integrating a 
Wellness Application into a Social Network Site. In 
International Conference on Persuasive Technology 
(PERSUASIVE 2010): 27–39. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-13226-1_5 

42. Michael Nelson, M Atkinson, and S Darbyshire. 1996. 
Food Photography II: Use of Food Photographs for 
Estimating Portion Size and the Nutrient Content of 
Meals. The British Journal of Nutrition 76, 1: 31–49. 
http://doi.org/10.1079/BJN19960007 

43. Mark W Newman, Debra Lauterbach, Sean A Munson, 
Paul Resnick, and Margaret E Morris. 2011. “It’s not 
that I don’t have problems , I’m just not putting them on 
Facebook”: Challenges and Opportunities in Using 
Online Social Networks for Health. Proceedings of the 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work (CSCW 2011): 341–350. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1958824.1958876 

44. Andrea Grimes Parker. 2014. Reflection-Through-

Performance: Personal Implications of Documenting 
Health Behaviors for the Collective. Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing 18, 7: 1737–1752. 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s00779-014-0780-5 

50. Chris Schaefbauer, Danish Kahn, Amy Le, Garrett 
Sczechowski, and Katie Siek. 2015. Snack Buddy: 
Supporting Healthy Snacking in Low Socioeconomic 
Status Families. Proceedings of the ACM Conference on 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social 
Computing (CSCW 2015): 1045–1057. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2675133.2675180 

51. Edison Thomaz, Aman Parnami, Irfan Essa, and Gregory D 
Abowd. 2013. Feasibility of Identifying Eating Moments 
from First-Person Images Leveraging Human Computation. 
Proceedings of the 4th International SenseCam & Pervasive 
Imaging Conference: 26–33. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/2526667.2526672 

52. Tammy Toscos, Anne Faber, Shunying An, and Mona 

Praful Gandhi. 2006. Chick Clique: Persuasive 
Technology to Motivate Teenage Girls to Exercise.  
CHI ’06 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems 31, 3: 1873–1878. 
http://doi.org/10.1145/1125451.1125805 

53. Paul Wicks, Michael Massagli, Jeana Frost, Catherine 
Brownstein, Sally Okun, Timothy Vaughan, Richard 
Bradley, and James Heywood. 2010. Sharing Health 
Data for Better Outcomes on Patientslikeme. Journal of 
Medical Internet Research 12, 2: 1–12. 
http://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.1549 

Social Computing and HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA168654. Mary H Wilde and Suzanne Garvin. 2007. A Concept 
Analysis of Self-monitoring. Journal of Advanced 
Nursing 57, 3: 339–350.  
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2648.2006.04089.x 

55. Lydia Zepeda and David Deal. 2008. Think before You 
Eat: Photographic Food Diaries ss Intervention Tools to 
Change Dietary Decision Making and Attitudes. 
International Journal of Consumer Studies 32, 6: 692–698. 
http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1470-6431.2008.00725.x

Social Computing and HealthCHI 2017, May 6–11, 2017, Denver, CO, USA1687 
