UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

Why We Use and Abandon Smart Devices 

Amanda Lazar 
University of Washington 
alaz@uw.edu 

Christian Koehler 
Carnegie Mellon University 
ckoehler@andrew.cmu.edu 

Theresa Jean Tanenbaum 
University of California, Irvine 
ttanen@uci.edu 

David H. Nguyen 
Nokia 
david.h.nguyen@nokia.com 

ABSTRACT 
Smart  devices  are  becoming  increasingly  commercially 
available. However, uptake of these devices has been slow 
and abandonment swift, which indicates that smart devices 
may  not  currently  meet  the  needs  of  users.  To  advance  an 
understanding  of 
the  ways  users  benefit  from,  are 
challenged  by,  and  abandon  smart  devices,  we  asked  a 
group of users to purchase smart sensing devices to advance 
themselves towards a personal, self-defined goal. We found 
that participants abandoned devices because they did not fit 
with the their conceptions of themselves, the data collected 
by  devices  were  perceived  to  not  be  useful,  and  device 
maintenance  became  unmanageable.  Participants  used 
devices  because  they  had  developed  routines  and  because 
devices  were  useful,  satisfied  curiosity,  and  held  hope  for 
potential  benefit  to  them.  We  propose  ways  to  reduce 
barriers,  motivate  use,  and  argue  for  envisioning  an 
additional 
for  short-term 
interventions, in addition to standard long-term use.  

these  devices 

function  of 

Author Keywords 
Smart  devices;  wearable  devices;  personal  informatics 
systems; self tracking. 

ACM Classification Keywords 
H.5.2  Information  interfaces  and  presentation  (e.g.,  HCI):
Miscellaneous.

INTRODUCTION 
Smart  devices  promise  users  a  wealth  of  information  that 
will enable them to become the best versions of themselves. 
This  reasoning  follows  the  line  of  thought  that  more 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to 
post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission 
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.     
UbiComp '15, September 7–11, 2015, Osaka, Japan.        
Copyright 2015 © ACM 978-1-4503-3574-4/15/09…$15.00.        
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2750858.2804288 

information  about  one’s  activities  will  result  in  behavior 
change.  For  example,  many  activity  trackers  provide  users 
with  the  numbers  of  steps  taken  that  day  on  the  pretense 
that  knowing  this  information  will  cause  lifestyle  changes 
such  as  increased  physical  activity.  For  example,  the 
Hexoskin, a tanktop with embedded sensors, has the tagline 
“Know  More,  Live  Better”  (http://www.hexoskin.com/). 
The implication of this tagline is that having knowledge of 
the  metrics  measured  by  this  shirt  –  heart  rate,  heart  rate 
variability,  breathing 
rate,  breathing  volume,  steps, 
cadence, and calories – will lead the wearer to a better life. 

Given the promises made by the producers of these devices, 
one  might  expect  the  widespread  adoption  of  activity 
trackers  in  a  society  so  concerned  with  fitness  and  body 
image. According to one report [15], one in ten Americans 
over the age of 18 owns an activity tracker. However, of the 
people  who  do  purchase  activity  trackers,  many  fail  to  use 
the  devices  long  term.  More  than  half  of  people  who  own 
activity  trackers  no  longer  use  them,  and  a  third  of  people 
who own trackers stop using them within six months [15]. 
This  raises  several  questions.  Who  benefit  from  these 
devices? Why are people not using them? Particularly, what 
are the reasons people abandon them? 

To explore these questions, a group of users were asked to 
purchase smart  devices, sensors, and wearables  to advance 
themselves 
self-defined  goal. 
a  personal, 
Participants  were  interviewed  about  their  use  after  two 
months.  

towards 

In  this  paper,  we  explore  the  above  questions  and  expand 
on previous literature that discuss the motivations of smart 
device  users  and  the  barriers  that  they  experience.  We 
suggest ways to design smart devices to reduce barriers and 
to  increase  motivation  to  use  smart  devices.  Finally,  we 
raise  a  question  as  to  whether  the  ideal  of  sustained  long-
term use is appropriate for all users and all goals. 

RELATED WORK 
Smart devices have been an area of focus for UbiComp and 
HCI for many years. We are using the term smart devices to 
refer to devices that automatically gather information about 

635

Most up-to-date version: 11-12-2020

users  or  their  environment  to  assist  them  in  gaining 
knowledge  about  themselves  and/or  taking  action.  Other 
terms  that  have  been  used  to  refer  to  smart  devices  are 
personal informatics systems [16] and quantified self [5]. 

Routine and Motivation 
HCI  and  Ubicomp  researchers  have  studied  ways  to 
increase  motivation  to  participate  in  healthy  or  socially 
desirable  behaviors.  Across  various  theories,  a  variety  of 
factors  are  believed  to  contribute  to  motivation,  such  as 
personal  affect  (e.g.  feelings),  social  interaction  (e.g. 
cooperation),  and  task  related  (e.g.  curiosity)  factors  [3]. 
Different  individuals  are  motivated  by  different  goals;  in 
the  case  of  health,  goals  may  include  maintaining  one’s 
own or another’s health state or increasing wellness [12]. 

Researchers have explored the relationship between routine 
and motivation. Barretto et al. describe the significant effect 
of  routine  on  the  motivation  of  families  to  take  part  in 
environmentally  friendly  behavior  [4].  Though  routines 
sometimes serves as factors contributing to motivation, they 
can  also  be  independent  of  or  even  in  opposition  to 
motivation. According to rational choice theory, consumers 
make  decisions  based  on  maximizing  the  benefit  to  them, 
based  on  their  individual  preferences,  goals,  and  options 
[13]. However, routine and habit drive many decisions and 
behaviors, sometimes regardless of a desire to do something 
different  [13].  Though  routines  regularly  shape  decisions, 
they  are  not  completely 
the  case  of 
environmentally  friendly  behaviors,  Gram-Hanssen  argues 
that,  rather  than  due  to  environmental  concerns,  routines 
have  changed  historically  as  a  result  of  the  introduction  of 
technologies  as  well  as  how  the  social  organization  of 
everyday life has shifted [13]. In particular, routines around 
ICT use change very quickly [13].  

fixed. 

In 

Studies of Smart Devices 
Researchers  have  explored  the  ways  smart  devices  can  be 
adopted into routines or build motivation. Researchers have 
explored  smart  devices  for  purposes  as  diverse  as 
encouraging  more  environmentally  friendly  behavior  (e.g. 
[10])  and  for  home  surveillance  (e.g.  [24]).  Smart  devices 
have  also  been  explored  extensively  in  the  domain  of 
health. Activity trackers have been used extensively in this 
domain, as have various sensors documenting other aspects 
important  to  health  (such  as  sensors  that  monitor  UV 
exposure [8]). Activity trackers and mHealth devices utilize 
a  variety  of  strategies  to  encourage  users:  Klasnja  et  al. 
outlined  the  ways  these  devices  encourage  wellness, 
including 
tracking  and  feedback,  goal  setting,  social 
influence, and gamification [14]. 

In  addition  to  exploring  a  range  of  uses,  researchers  have 
explored  a  range  of  sensors,  from  commercially  available 
sensors  to  prototypes  such  as  Lim  et  al.’s  shoe-worn 
pedometer  that  measures  users’  physical  activity  and 
provides feedback through varying intensities of light [18]. 
Some researchers have even allowed participants in studies 
to  design their  own input  devices [2]. Another approach is 

636

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

to  utilize  a  combination  of  commercially  available  and 
prototype  interfaces.  Examples  of  this  approach  are  Walsh 
et al.’s StepCity, which used commercially available Fitbits 
as  an  interface  for  a  social  game  that  they  designed  [25], 
and Lin et al.’s Fish’n’Steps, a virtual pet that responded to 
the  number  of  steps 
taken  by  participants  wearing 
commercially available pedometers [19]. 

Studies  Focused  on  Those  with  Acute  Health  Needs  and 
Users who Have Integrated Devices into their Lives 
Many studies have examined the use of smart devices with 
highly  motivated  individuals,  such  as  those  with  acute 
health  needs.  One  example  is  participants  who  have 
attended  physical  therapy,  which  were  the  population 
studied  by  Ananthanarayan  et  al.  in  the  evaluation  of  a 
wearable  prototype  to  assist  in  knee  rehabilitation  [1]. 
Another  group  of  highly  motivated  people  are  those  who 
may not have had specific physical disabilities or conditions 
but  were  recruited  for  their  interest  in  increasing  physical 
activity,  such  as  participants  in  trials  of  UbiFit  Garden,  an 
activity  tracker  integrated  with  a  mobile  phone  that 
provides users with a glanceable symbolic representation of 
goal adherence [6][7]. 

Another  user  base  that  has  been  studied  extensively  are 
users  who  had  integrated  smart  devices  into  their  lives  at 
the  point  of  study.  Rooksby  et  al.  interviewed  a  group  of 
participants,  the  majority  of  whom  were  using  activity 
trackers  at  the  start  of  the  study  [13].  They  found  that 
personal tracking was enmeshed in these participants’ lives 
(which  they  called  ‘lived  informatics)  and  that  people 
changed  the  tracker  they  used  depending  on  their  current 
short-term  or  long-term  goal.  Fritz  et  al.  interviewed 
participants, all of whom were using activity trackers at the 
time  of  the  interview  [9].  Even  under  changing  goals  and 
practices  over 
time,  participants  derived  value  and 
motivation  from  use  of  devices,  even  over  long  periods  of 
use.  Li  et  al.  administered  surveys  and  interviews  to 
individuals engaged in personal data tracking and identified 
barriers  that  occurred  through  the  different  stages  of  using 
smart devices that they identified [16]. In another study by 
Li et al., participants who had been self-tracking for at least 
one  month  were  interviewed  about  the  questions  they  had 
about the data they collected [12].   Choe et al. investigated 
how a group of Quantified-Selfers (whom they define as an 
“extreme  users”)  collected  and  explored  personal  data  [5]. 
These users created workarounds to manage barriers of the 
technologies  they  used,  and  many  built  their  own  smart 
devices and systems. Implications from this study included 
ways to support users in self-experimentation and reflecting 
on  data.  A common finding in the studies described above 
is  that  participants  successfully  integrate  the  devices  into 
their lives by either modifying the devices or their routines, 
and that they were willing to and interested in finding ways 
to work around device barriers.  

Although many of the participants in the studies mentioned 
above had used trackers and integrated them into their lives 

SESSION: ENGAGEMENT AND DISENGAGEMENT

before studies began, we suggest that there is also a need to 
examine  users  who  are  not  willing  or  able  to  integrate 
devices in their lives. 

use 

and 

affected 

characteristics 

Studies Exploring Use and Abandonment 
Some  researchers  have  explored  the  use  of  devices  among 
people  who  do  not  appear  to  be  as  willing  to  overcome 
device  barriers.  Shih  et  al.  examined  the  ways  personal 
preferences 
and 
abandonment  of  Fitbit  activity  trackers  given  to  college 
students over six weeks [22]. Participants abandoned Fitbits 
quickly  (65%  stopped  using  them  at  two  weeks)  and  had 
issues  remembering  to  wear  the  device.  Additionally, 
participants were unsatisfied with the passive nature of the 
system  and  wanted  active  triggers  about  reaching  their 
goals.  Some  participants  were  also  unsatisfied  with  the 
appearance and obtrusiveness of devices. Though this study 
explored  users  who  are  not  highly  motivated,  users  used 
devices manufactured by a single company, which does not 
expose barriers across devices. 

Below, we describe a study in which participants who were 
not  recruited  based  on  acute  health  needs  or  having 
integrated  devices  into  their  lives  were  given  funds  to 
purchase whichever devices they wished to use. We explore 
questions around use and abandonment of devices.  

METHOD 

Procedure 
Participants  were  recruited  through  convenience  sampling 
at  a  technology  company.  At  the  start  of  the  study, 
participants  were  surveyed  to  find  what  goals,  objectives, 
and passions they were interested in addressing with smart 
devices.  Participants  were  then  given  the  opportunity  to 
purchase  up  to  $1,000  of  smart  devices  to  advance  them 
towards a goal they were passionate about (see Table 1 for 
goals and devices). Participants were asked to choose their 
own  goals  based  on  the  assumption  that  self-defined  goals 
would  motivate  them  much  more  than  pre-defined  goals. 
Participants  were  free  to  choose  whichever  devices  they 
wished to purchase and were reimbursed. Some participants 
they  had 
told  other  participants  about 
purchased, and because of this, certain devices were bought 
by  many  participants.  Approximately  two  months  later, 
the  devices 
participants  were 
the  purchases. 
the  reasoning  behind 
purchased  and 
Typically  lasting  about  one  hour,  the  semi-structured 
interview also ascertained if and why the devices were still 
in  regular  use,  whether  participants  experienced  any 
benefits or disadvantages from using the devices, as well as 
previous experiences with smart devices.  

the  devices 

interviewed 

to  discuss 

No  monetary  compensation  was  given  to  the  participants, 
but they were permitted to keep any devices purchased. 

Participants 

17  participants  (13  male)  were  recruited.  The  participants 
included  engineers,  interns,  an  executive  assistant,  and  the 

637

partner  of  an  employee.  Five  were  in  the  age  category  18-
29,  three  30-39,  six  40-49,  and  three  50-59.  Three  had 
completed  some  college,  ten  had  bachelor’s  degrees,  three 
had master’s degrees, and one had a PhD. Nine identified as 
Asian or Asian American, five as white, and three as other. 
One person identified as Hispanic/Latino. 

Participants were recruited at a technology company. Their 
familiarity  with  technology  was  beneficial  for  multiple 
reasons.  First,  through  their  work  and  network,  they  were 
more  likely  to  be  aware  of  different  devices  and  therefore 
likely selected a wider variety of devices than from a group 
unfamiliar  with  the  landscape  of  smart  devices.  Second, 
these  participants  were  more  likely  to  know  how  to 
troubleshoot  devices  on  their  own,  thus  less  likely  to 
abandon  devices  due  to  technical  issues.  However,  it  is 
important  to  note  that  although  the  participants  were 
comfortable  with  computing  devices  in  general,  they  were 
not  necessarily  experts  –  or  even  knowledgeable  – 
that  would  advance 
regarding 
themselves towards the goals (e.g. health, productivity) that 
they wished to pursue. In other words, participants may be 
able 
they  will  not 
necessarily  know  the  best  ways  to  apply  the  devices 
towards their goals. 

the  specific  sensors 

the  devices,  but 

troubleshoot 

to 

interviews  and 

interviews  were  audio  recorded  and 

Analysis 
transcribed. 
All 
transcripts  were 
Detailed  notes  from 
analyzed  using  open  and  axial  coding  by  two  of  the 
researchers  to  identify  emergent  themes.  The  coding 
scheme  was  discussed  and  finalized.  Once  the  coding 
scheme was finalized, all interview data was then coded and 
shared  with  the  research  team.  As  themes  emerged,  they 
were merged into the codebook.  

RESULTS 
Below  we  describe  the  sensors  purchased,  and  why 
participants used and stopped using devices. 

Participant goals and devices 

What were participant goals? 
During  the  initial  interviews  at  the  start  of  the  study, 
participants  expressed  a  range  of  goals,  from  increasing 
fitness  to  reducing  pain  to  playing  Ping-Pong  better  (see 
Table  1).  Most  of  these  goals  (13)  pertained  to  mental  or 
physical  health  and  fitness,  two  to  improving  performance 
at  a  sport,  and  three  to  improving  productivity  or  focus. 
Given  that  participants  could  choose  any  goal,  it  is 
interesting that the majority chose health and fitness, which 
may be the result of the current marketing of commercially 
available smart devices.  

Surprisingly, devices purchased often did not appear to map 
to  goals.  For  example,  P7  purchased  the  Misfit  Shine,  a 
wearable  pedometer,  although  his  goal  was  to  reduce  his 
neck and shoulder pain. This suggests that either users may 
not have the expertise of how devices would suit their goals 
or users may not have the expertise of how their goals can 

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

goal  of  increasing  physical  activity,  P12  said,  “…  I  don't 
really  need  to  know  this  information  every  single  day.  If  I 
were an avid health freak, maybe, but I'm not.” Participants 
also  mentioned  older  adults  as  benefiting  more  from 
devices,  as  they  were  likely  to  have  more  health  needs. 
Participants  saw  sensors  as  appropriate  for  others,  not 
themselves, and therefore had less interest in using them. 

Data collected was not useful 
Participants  perceived  the  data  collected  as  not  useful 
because they were not interested in the level of information 
the  data  gave  them.  Many  participants  mentioned  that  the 
number  of  steps  they  took  was  not  interesting  –  including 
participants who had decided to purchase smart pedometers. 
Some  reasons  participants  mentioned  that  steps  were  not 
interesting  were  that  walking  was  not  considered  exercise 
(P10)  or  that  walking  did  not  impact  mood,  which  the 
participant had actually learned by wearing the sensor (P9). 
Even  sensors  that  were  more  specialized  than  pedometers 
were  not  seen  as  beneficial:  the  specialized  sports  sensors 
(94Fifty  basketball  and  Babolat  tennis  racket)  did  not 
provide the information that participants found most useful 
(such  as  whether  or  not  the  basketball  went  through  the 
hoop). Additionally, one participant who exercised 18 hours 
a  week  said,  “How  can  a  Fitbit  measure  [how  fit  I’m 
getting]? They don't know that. It doesn't really matter if I 
do a hundred sit-ups... a trainer, they tell you what is it that 
you  [should]  eat,  how  much  sleep  [you  should]  get,  and 
what  kind  of  quantities  of  protein  you  [should]  eat  versus 
vegetables,  or  things  like  that.”  Interestingly,  the  more 

be reached. Another possibility is that devices do not exist 
that  matches  some  of  these  goals.  This  issue  is  explored 
further in the discussion. 

What kinds of devices were used? 
The majority of devices used were health or fitness sensors, 
corresponding  to  the  majority  of  goals  (see  Table  1). 
Interestingly, though participants were free to purchase any 
type of device, the majority purchased wearable devices. Of 
the  49  devices  used,  35  were  purchased  with  study  funds 
and  14  were  obtained  some  other  way  during  the  study 
period  or  before  the  study  had  started  (purchased  with 
personal  funds,  purchased  with  work  funds  for  a  different 
project,  found,  or  borrowed  from  a  participant  who  had 
purchased the device).   

Why Did Participants Stop Using Devices? 
Participants  abandoned  almost  80%  of  devices  purchased 
for  this  study  within  the  first  two  months  (see  Table  2). 
Sensors were abandoned for a variety of reasons, primarily 
in  three  categories:  devices  not  fitting  with  participants’ 
conceptions of themselves, collected data not being useful, 
and devices requiring too much work and maintenance. 

Did not fit with their conceptions of themselves 
Participants frequently referred to other types of people (as 
opposed  to  themselves)  for  whom  devices  might  be  more 
useful.  Most  frequently  mentioned  were  people  with  what 
were considered extreme fitness needs, such as those trying 
to lose large amounts of weight and athletes. For example, 
regarding  whether  her  devices  advanced  her  toward  her 

Id 
P1 

Goal 
Reduce neck pain 

P2 

Take body to the next level of fitness 

Device 
Lumoback 
Lumoback,  Basis  watch,  Withings  wireless  blood  pressure  monitor, 
Mindfield  eSense 
temperature,  Mindfield  eSense  skin  response, 
Heartmath Inner Balance-Lightning sensor 
Fitbit 
Jawbone, 94Fifty basketball 

P3 
P4 
P5 
P6 
P7 
P8 
P9 

Stay hydrated, feel at peak, reduce headaches 
Get better at basketball 
Detect heart issues, maintain healthy body & weight  MioAlpha heart rate sports watch, Metawatch* 
Be more fit, have more energy, lose belly 
Reduce neck and shoulder pain 
Improve health and wellbeing 
Feel good, determine the reason behind losing focus 

Muse, Mio Alpha, Fitbit, Withings scale, Metawatch* 
Misfit Shine 
Samsung Gear 2 Neo, Withings wireless blood pressure monitor  

P10 

Increase productivity and mindfulness 

P11 

Increase energy level 

Increase activity for endurance and weight loss 

P12 
P13  Get better at ping pong 
P14  Dream lucidly, improve posture and health/fitness 
P15 
P16 
P17 

Increase activity, lose weight 
Be able to run for 30 minutes, increase endurance 
Increase focus 

Samsung Gear fit, Lumoback 
Blood  pressure  monitor,  Pulse  rate  and  hypertension  monitor,  MIO 
Alpha heart rate sports watch* 
Hexoskin,  Pebble  watch,  Shine,  Lumoback,  Babolat  smart  tennis 
racket*, Zapp tennis racket, Metawatch* 
Misfit Shine, Jawbone, Hexoskin 
Garmin Fenix*, Pebble*, Moves app on phone, Lumoback 
Fitbit, Lumoback, REM 
Garmin Vivofit, Withings Scale 
Mio Alpha heart rate sports watch, Misfit Shine 
Misfit Shine, Basis health tracker for fitness, sleep, and stress 

* Device was personally owned or purchased for a different project 

Table 1. Participant goals and devices 

638

 
SESSION: ENGAGEMENT AND DISENGAGEMENT

athletic  participants  did  not  find  their  devices  useful, 
despite  the  perceptions  of  other  participants  that  the  more 
athletic types would be the ones who benefited most. 

Other participants were not interested in the collected data 
because  they  would  know  that  information  even  without 
using the device. P2 said, “If I go to bed at eight and count 
eight hours… I'm going to know. It's common sense. I went 
to bed at this time, and I woke up at this time.” The devices 
did  not  provide  any  new  or  useful 
to 
participants, so they did not see a reason to use the devices. 

information 

Another  reason  data  was  not  useful  to  participants  was 
because it was unprocessed. Participants did not know what 
to  do  with  the  data:  as  P12  said,  “It  gave  me  a  lot  of 
information,  but  I  don't  know  what  to  do  with  any  of  this 
information.... My heart rate is this much. But I don't know 
what that means. Am I supposed to be within this range and 
this range? If I am, what does that mean?” P16 said “I don't 
know  what  to  do  with  that  sort  medical  data  once  I've 
collected it... I'm not in that kind of professional capacity to 
analyze  the  data.”  Through  statements  such  as  these, 
participants such as P12 and P16 expressed they lacked the 
skill and expertise to interpret data collected by the devices. 
Interestingly,  they  did  not  mention  attempts  to  decipher 
data  by  utilizing  online 
resources  or  healthcare 
professionals,  even  though  some  of  this  information  (such 
as  suggested  ranges  for  heart  range  by  age)  is  freely 
available  online.  Participants  may  not  have  realized  that 
these resources were available and might need more explicit 
instruction on how to interpret data. 

As  described  above,  there  was  often  no  instruction  or 
prompting given to users on how to analyze collected data. 
Participants were not interested in quantifying behavior just 
for the sake of getting a number; they wanted to know what 
to  do  with  that  number.  As  P16  said,  “Wearing  the  watch 
doesn't help me to sleep better… I wanted to be healthy, but 
wearing  the  watch  is  not  going  to  give  me  better  sleep  or 
make  me  healthier.  It  just  tells  me  whether  I  have  a  good 
sleep or a bad sleep… it's not productive or useful.” In this 
case, the data collected were not only unprocessed, but also 
did not give the participant any actionable information. 

Status of device after two months 

Still using (at least four days a week) 
Using  for  a  ‘non-smart’  purpose  (e.g. 
alarm function of activity tracker) 
Not  using  but  plan  to  use  again  in  the 
future 
Not using and no plan to use again 
Ordered but did not receive yet 

Percentage 

20% (10/49) 

10% (5/49) 

22% (11/49) 

45% (22/49) 
2% (1/49) 

Table 2: Use of devices at exit interview 

Even when devices gave users actionable information, some 
users  were  unwilling  or  unable  to  take  action.  This 
happened  when  participants  could  not  meet  device  goals 
because  of  environmental  factors,  such  as  P1  (trying  to 
reduce neck pain) who said, “I would take [the] LumoBack 
[posture  sensor]  off  when  I  go  home  because  at  that  point 
I'm  with  my  daughter…  I'm  in  all  kinds  of  different 
positions.  My  posture  sucks  all  night  and  I  know  that.  I 
don't  need  to  be  bothered  by  it.”  Even  when  participants 
could  alter  behavior,  some  noted  feeling  that  they  did  not 
have to meet goals set by the  manufacturers of the device. 
Regarding meeting the default goal of 10,000 steps, P7 said, 
"I'm doing this for myself... If I get it, I get it. If I don't, I 
don't. In general, you just know you need to exercise more.” 
The  goals  advocated  by  the  device  manufacturers  did  not 
possess  greater  authority 
than  messages  participants 
encountered promoting health behaviors on a regular basis.  
Participants  did  not  perceive  real  repercussions  to  not 
satisfying the device and viewed advice from the device as 
suggestions rather than prescriptions.  

Too much extra work/maintenance 
Extra  work  and  maintenance  was  a  significant  issue  for 
many  participants,  especially  because  they  were  getting  so 
little benefit. For example, P9 had been using the Samsung 
Gear Fit smart watch, to control his phone without taking it 
out  of  his  pocket.  He  lamented  that  “just  to  have  that  one 
benefit  [of  controlling  a  phone]  I  have  to:  one,  charge  it. 
Two,  wear  it  on  my  other  wrist.  And  three,  always  make 
sure  it's  paired  with  Bluetooth.  [Also],  it's  wasting  my 
phone's  battery  to  keep  that  Bluetooth  connection  paired 
and  I'd  have  to  charge  [the  phone]  as  well.”  Participants 
acknowledged that if the device had been more useful, they 
would  have  been  willing  to  make  more  of  an  effort;  when 
asked  why  he  was  not  using  his  device,  P10  said,  “Other 
things. Other commitments I have to do. Not enough time. I 
guess  I  [would]  make  time  if  it's  interesting  enough.  It 
didn't  seem  interesting  enough.”  The  devices  did  not  yield 
enough value for participants to be willing to engage in the 
time consuming process of maintaining devices.  

A  high  frequency  of  maintenance  was  a  factor  that  greatly 
discouraged  participants  from  use.  The  need  to  charge 
devices  often  was  mentioned  by  many  as  highly 
inconvenient.  Having  to  provide  input  to  the  device 
frequently  (such  as  calibrating  the  LumoBack  posture 
sensor  or  entering  food  into  a  food  diary  connected  to  the 
Jawbone)  was  also  mentioned  as  an  obstacle.  Participants 
considered benefits when determining how much work they 
were  willing  to  do;  P5  questioned  the  value  of  smart 
devices,  “...  years  ago,  you  [wore]  a  watch  that  you 
[wouldn’t]  have  to  charge  for  a  whole  year.  We  are  going 
back.  It's  okay  [with  the  phone]  because  it  replaces  [your] 
laptop  partially…  What  is  that  on  the  wearable  that  would 
offset that inconvenience of recharging every few days…?” 
Some  participants  turned  off  the  “smart”  functions  to 
reduce  the  need  to  charge  devices.  P10  said  that  his  Mio 
Alpha heart rate watch “charges fairly often if I was using 

639

 
 
the heart rate monitor. After a point… I would use it more 
like a timepiece rather than a heart rate monitor.”  

devices  were  perceived  as  even  more  uncomfortable  when 
bands were made of rubber and participants sweat in them. 

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

Another  way  the  use  of  smart  devices  was  too  much  extra 
work  was  when  use  did  not  fit  with  routines.  Participants 
did  not  remember  to  or  want  to  do  seemingly  low-effort 
activities such as tapping devices to put them in a mode to 
track sleep. Some participants grew tired of bringing tablets 
around with them as their phones were not compatible with 
devices. They also mentioned that it took time to get into a 
routine of use, even to remember to put on a device; “Even 
a  watch,  it's  taught.  It's  trained.  I've  been  wearing  a  watch 
since  I  was  six.  It's  a  learned  behavior.  I'm  comfortable 
wearing a watch. If I don't wear a watch, I feel naked. I feel 
something's missing. But, with a wearable, I just don't have 
that patience to train myself to learn to wear it. I think the 
biggest  thing  is  the  benefit.  I  just  don't  see  that  much 
benefit.”  P7  acknowledged  that  it  was  possible  to  train 
himself  to  remember  to  wear  the  device,  but  given  that 
there was so little benefit, it was not worth doing.  

Some  participants  managed  to  develop  a  routine,  but  once 
they  fell  out  of  the  routine,  even  for  a  day,  they  often  did 
not recover. Three participants mentioned vacation affected 
their use: P17, who periodically lacked Internet on vacation, 
said,  “You  kind  of  lose  interest  after  you  lose  that  first 
instance of focus on it. After I went on vacation… I didn't 
care anymore because I had stopped looking at it for four or 
five days… it lost all appeal to me.” The device running out 
of charge was also a reason many fell out of routine: as P9 
said, “… I forgot to charge it one day, and I haven't charged 
it  since.  If  it  was  always  charged,  I  think  I'd  still  wear  it.” 
Some  participants  explained  that  they  felt  a  sense  of  relief 
when they fell out of a routine: P14 said “Once I went a few 
days without it: it was like ‘I guess I really don't need it to 
survive’…  you're  like,  ‘It  feels  good  not  to  have  to  work 
out.  It  feels  good  without  something  buzzing  at  me  to  tell 
me my posture is crappy.’" Sometimes, the realization that 
they felt relief or did not miss the device after falling out of 
a  routine  led  participants  to  consciously  abandon  the 
device:  P12  said  “I  just  forget  about  it,  and  I  guess  that 
started the decline of me wearing it to bed, because I realize 
it's  not  changing  my  life.  At  that  point  it  was  like,  I'm  not 
wearing it, and it's not making a difference at all... so why 
am I bothering wearing it?” Again, the lack of benefit from 
using the device led participant to abandon the device rather 
then attempting to reintegrate it into their routine. 

Participants  hesitated  to  expend  effort  adjusting  devices  or 
the mental energy to become accustomed to uncomfortable 
devices.  When  a  device  was  extremely  uncomfortable,  it 
was  often  abandoned  hastily,  even  when  participants  were 
interested  in  the  information  tracked.  Several  participants 
said they were not used to wearing jewelry or bracelets and 
the  device  felt  uncomfortable.  Another  element  considered 
uncomfortable  was  when  devices  had  to  be  worn  tight 
around 
the 
LumoBack,  Hexoskin,  and  heart  rate  monitors).  Tight 

to  function  properly  (such  as 

the  body 

Similar 
to  uncomfortable  devices,  obtrusive  devices 
required  extra  work  from  participants.  For  example,  P10 
said that he stopped using a wireless blood pressure monitor 
after  a  single  use  because,  “It  was  too  big.  It  was 
cumbersome.  It  was  difficult.  It  was  not  as  mobile  as  I 
expected  it  to  be.”  Conversely,  some  participants  wore 
devices that were perceived as unobtrusive even when they 
did  not  see  much  value  in  the  data.  For  example,  P12  said 
that “I think what makes me like the Shine [activity tracker] 
most is just because it's so effortless. I don't think about it at 
all.  See,  because  I  don't  even  remember  it's  on  me,  and  I 
rarely ever check it anymore. That's the only reason why I 
still  keep  wearing  it.”  Even  though  P12  didn’t  check  her 
device  and  did  not  benefit  from  the  data  collected,  it  was 
very unobtrusive, and she therefore continued to wear it. 

to  a  general  sense  of  having 

The challenges of individual devices described above were 
compounded  when  participants  had  multiple  devices,  and 
participants  had  a  negative  perception  of  maintaining 
multiple devices. Interestingly, almost all participants spent 
well  under  $1,000  on  devices,  and  most  purchased  two  or 
fewer devices. When asked why they did not purchase more 
devices, many said that they did not want to experience the 
burden  associated  with  multiple  devices;  P14  said,  “I  just 
didn't want to wear that many things... I didn't want to give 
my  entire  life  over  to  these  devices.”  Participants  also 
referred 
too  many 
responsibilities  in  their  lives  that  manifested  in  a  desire  to 
have  fewer  devices.  When  asked  why  he  did  not  like 
wearing  devices,  P11  said,  “It's  just  one  more  thing.  We 
have so many things in our lives right now.” Similarly, P10 
said, “I have other commitments. I have other things that I 
do. There are things that I have to do for those things. This 
piece  of  technology  should  enhance  what  things  that  I  do 
outside  rather  than  take  up  my  brain  space...”  Like  other 
types  of  work,  not  getting  any  benefit  was  the  reason  that 
multiple  devices  caused  so  much  frustration:  “Carrying 
these  two,  three  devices,  I  used  to  keep  track  of  the 
charging... Eventually I thought, ‘What is the point of doing 
all these things?’" (P13). Each additional device resulted in 
another set of maintenance activities for participants. 

Why Did Participants Use Devices? 
Few devices were still being used at the exit interview, and 
even  fewer  at  the  time  of  this  writing.  Participants 
explained what kept them using devices through the course 
of the study, even when eventually abandoned. 

Useful 
A  subset  of  the  participants  had  experiences  where  the 
device was useful. We categorize the ways the devices were 
useful as major benefits and minor benefits, and momentary 
small benefits and benefits from “non-smart” features. 

Three  participants  experienced  major  benefits.  P1  (who  at 
the  time  of  this  writing  had  stopped  using  the  device  but 

640

SESSION: ENGAGEMENT AND DISENGAGEMENT

intended  to  wear  it  in  the  future)  wore  the  LumoBack 
posture  sensor  for  chronic  neck  pain.  She  thought  her 
posture  had  improved  significantly  from  her  use  of  the 
device.  She  attributed  her  better  posture  to  instantaneous 
feedback  but  also  because  she  was  strengthening  the 
muscles involved in correct posture. P10 (who had stopped 
wearing his device, but planned to use it again in the future) 
learned  to  control  his  anxiety  and  breathe  deeply  in  social 
situations from using the device. P15 said her device helped 
her get more healthy and active and lose weight.  

Some  participants  experienced  minor  benefits  after  they 
stopped wearing the devices, such as being more conscious 
of  posture,  getting  up  to  walk  around  during  the  day,  or 
taking the stairs instead of the elevator. 

Many  participants  mentioned  an  increased  awareness  of 
physical  activity  while  wearing  the  devices,  which  we  see 
as  a  momentary  small  benefit.  While  wearing  the  devices, 
some  participants  initially  tried  to  increase  step  counts. 
Another  participant  used  the  Phyode  W/me,  a  heart  rate 
sensor with a breathing app, to increase mindfulness during 
the day. While participants appreciated these benefits when 
they occurred, they did not necessarily persist. 

Participants  also  experienced  benefit  from  “non-smart” 
features, such as seeing the time or setting alarms. Several 
participants  continued  wearing  smart  devices  as  watches 
and  either  turned  off  or  did  not  view  the  smart  functions. 
Conversely,  smart  devices  worn  on  the  wrists  that  did  not 
show the time (such as the Fitbit Flex) were abandoned by 
some  participants  who  did  not  want  to  wear  multiple 
devices and therefore chose a watch over the device. 

Curiosity and novelty 
As  has  been  found  in  other  studies  (e.g.  [20][23]),  the 
novelty of a device affects use. In this study, the novelty of 
the  device  and  curiosity  about  the  device  and  data  was  a 
compelling  motivator  for  participants  to  begin  using 
devices, and many participants experienced enjoyment from 
playing  with  a  new  “toy.”  However,  as  P10  said,  “[during 
the]  first  few  days,  it  was  a  new  thing  so  it  was  novel 
enough  that  I  didn't  mind  that  extra  hassle.  After  a  while, 
that negative impact was too much.” For many participants, 
a  drop  off  effect  occurred  as  novelty  diminished  and  the 
cost of maintaining the device became irritating. 

Curiosity was often sated after participants discovered some 
quantified number about their activities. P13 said, “After a 
point I get a rough estimate as to how much I am walking 
every  day,  so  I  don't  need  a  step  counter  to  tell  me…  I've 
got  a  mental  map.”  Like  P13,  others  lost  interest  in  using 
devices once they developed a sense of what data would be 
generated when they engaged in various activities. 

The drop off effect was less apparent for a participant using 
a device sporadically: “Fitbit is for day-to-day use, and the 
Garmin Fenix [a GPS navigator and activity tracker] is only 
for a particular use, and at a particular time… the number of 
times  I  go  for  hiking  is  maybe  once  a  week…  so  I  don't 

641

mind  carrying  that  extra  device,  only  for  that  hiking 
purpose... But for the FitBit, it's a day-to-day activity. After 
a  point,  it  loses  its  relevance.”  It  appears  that  since  the 
device was for a dedicated activity, the participant was able 
to  overlook  issues  with  the  device  that  would  have 
prevented  him  from  using  it  for  an  everyday  activity.  Had 
he gone hiking more regularly, he thought it was likely that 
he would be bothered by the obtrusiveness of the device. 

Hope for potential use 
Another  factor  that  kept  participants  using  devices  was 
hope  that  the  current  capabilities  of  devices  would  be 
extended someday with new ways to process recorded data.  

Participants hoped that data would benefit themselves, and 
some  also  mentioned  that  they  hoped  their  using  the 
technology  would  lead  to  benefits  for  others.  A  few  stated 
plans  to  devise  their  own  algorithms  to  correlate  different 
aspects of their behavior. However, none of the participants 
had designed these systems at the time of the interview. 

This hope for potential use kept some participants using and 
increased the frequency with which they used devices after 
they had lost interest in the novelty of the data, even when 
data  was  not  useful  to  them.  This  expectation  for  future 
benefit  led  participants  to  stop  using  devices  that  did  not 
store  data.  Because  the  potential  benefit  came  from  data, 
devices that did not store data were less desired. 

The  hope  for  use  of  collected  data  may  be  why  most 
participants placed a great deal of importance on accuracy, 
despite many not viewing the data. The desire for accuracy 
impacted  which  devices  participants  chose  and  kept  using. 
Although P10 had been benefiting from using his heart rate 
monitor to learn about how to manage his anxiety in social 
situations,  hearing  that  the  device  was  inaccurate  was  one 
factor  that  led  to  his  abandonment  of  the  device.  He 
explained  that  he  “felt  cheated”  when  he  heard  that  the 
device  was  not  accurate,  and  that  it  bothered  him  because 
“If  [the  heart  rate  measurements  were]  not  objectively 
accurate, I was going by some number they produced and I 
didn't know whether to believe it or not.” He went on to say 
that  he  still  used  the  strategies  he  had  learned  from  using 
the  heart  rate  monitor,  but  had  “stopped  relying  on  the 
sensor”. Even though the number “did not seem that off” to 
him and he had not verified that the device was inaccurate, 
the  chance  of  the  device  being  inaccurate  was  enough  for 
him to stop trusting the data generated by the sensor.  

Developed routine of use  
Despite  neither  receiving benefit nor having their curiosity 
satisfied,  participants  would  sometimes  persist  in  using  a 
device  because  they  had  developed  a  routine  of  doing  so. 
For example, when asked why he still wore his Misfit Shine 
even  though  he  no  longer  viewed  the  data,  P17  said,  “I 
think  I  just  developed  a  habit  over  the  last  couple  of 
months...  I  guess  I  just  put  it  on  to  put  it  on.”  Even  when 
participants  saw  little  use,  they  still  wore  it  “because  it's 
kind of a habit now” (P17). Participants justified continuing 

the “habit” with a variety of reasons, including getting use 
out of something that they had purchased. Additionally, as 
long as these devices were not obtrusive and did not require 
extra  work,  participants  would  continue  using  the  device 
until  an  issue  arose  that  interrupted  the  routine,  such  as 
maintenance  activities  or  travel.  This  suggests  that  once 
people begin to use a device, they may be likely to continue 
using it simply because they grow accustomed to doing so. 

Seven participants were still using devices at the end of the 
study.  P1  and  P15  still  used  their  devices  because  they 
found  them  useful.  P17  did  not  look  at  the  data  from  his 
Shine  but  had  developed  a  routine  of  wearing  it.  P6,  P7, 
P12,  and  P13  wore  their  devices  to  satisfy  curiosity  or 
because  they  saw  potential  use.  This  suggests  that  though 
curiosity faded for many participants, some continued to be 
curious  about  their  data,  which  sustained  their  use.  It  is 
interesting  to  note  which  types  of  devices  were  still  being 
used compared to how many were purchased. Of two smart 
scales used in the course of the study, both were still being 
used. Of thirteen activity trackers used during the study, six 
were  still  being  used  two  month  later,  half  of  which  were 
the  Misfit  Shine  (the  activity  tracker  that  was  noted  by 
participants  as  requiring  very  low  maintenance).  Out  of 
thirteen smart watches used over the course of the study and 
the six posture detectors, only one of smart watch and one 
posture  detector  was  being  used  at  the  end  of  the  study. 
These numbers suggest that participants were more likely to 
continue  to  use  activity  trackers,  particularly  unobtrusive 
ones,  than  smart  watches  (many  of  which  had  similar 
functions as activity trackers, such as counting steps). One 
possible  explanation  for  this  discrepancy  is  that  activity 
trackers required less charging and also were less bulky. 

Limitations 
We  acknowledge  several  limitations  to  this  study.  First, 
giving  participants  funds  to  purchase  devices  may  have 
affected  their  choices  and  use  of  devices.  One  participant 
mentioned that he would have valued the device more if he 
had spent his own money and felt that he had to “get [his] 
money’s  worth.”  Providing  participants  with  funds  may 
have had the opposite effect for others; some said that they 
used the device or felt an obligation to exercise because of 
the  study.  However,  many  who  were  using  devices  for 
those reasons had stopped by the time of the interview. 

Moreover, two months is not necessarily long enough to see 
if users have adopted a device (or would abandon a device 
shortly  after  the  study  ended).  However,  most  of  the 
participants  who  were  still  using  devices  were  not  overtly 
committed  to  continuing  use.  Waiting  longer  to  interview 
participants  would  have  meant  that  the  exact  reasons  for 
continued  use  and  benefits  would  have  faded.  The  reader 
should therefore not assume that the users fully adopted the 
ten devices that were being used at the exit interview. 

Furthermore,  participants  used  a  slew  of  devices.  The 
devices  had  varying  functionalities  and  affordances  and 
the  experiences  of  participants 
therefore 

impacted 

642

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

differently. However, allowing users to select their devices 
allowed  them  to  buy  the  device  that  was  potentially  most 
useful  to  them,  thereby  increasing  the  chance  that  they 
might  benefit  from  them.  This  approach  also  resulted  in 
similar  findings  across  different  types  of  devices  (such  as 
issues  with  charging),  which  strengthens  their  significance 
and likelihood to apply to other similar devices.  

Additionally,  seven  participants  had  used  smart  devices 
previously,  though  not  for  an  extended  amount  of  time. 
Future studies should examine people with less exposure to 
smart  devices,  as  they  might  display  different  patterns  of 
use and motivations and barriers to use. 

Finally,  not  surprisingly,  some  participants,  especially  the 
technology-positive  views. 
engineers,  expressed  very 
Future studies would be well served to examine people with 
mixed attitudes to technology. Additionally, it is likely that 
being  in  a  technology  company  affected  the  opinions  and 
experience  of  participants  in  this  study.  For  example,  it  is 
possible  that  a  greater  familiarity  with  the  way  a  device 
works (and should work) could lead to increased frustration 
over  a  device  not  working  properly  or  being  designed 
poorly.  It  is  important  for  researchers  to  explore  the 
experience of participants with other backgrounds and work 
experience.  This  study  also  focuses  on  a  group  limited  in 
terms  of  diversity.  In  particular,  the  sample  was  primarily 
male,  and  this  gender  ratio  may  have  affected  the  devices 
purchased as well as their use and abandonment [22].  

Given  the  limitations  described  above,  we  make  no  claims 
to  experimental  validity,  or  to  any  objective  “truth”  in  this 
work.  While  the  responses  that  we  observed  do  not 
constitute a ground truth, however, they are both “real” and 
“useful”  in  that  they  represent  a  diverse  sampling  of 
wearable  device  usage  that  has  been  driven  by  the 
preferences  of  the  subjects,  rather  than  a  top-down, 
experimental  structure.  We  contend  that  the  collected  data 
represents an important first look at some of these identified 
behaviors  and  attitudes.  We  believe  that  the  themes  and 
observations that arose from this data are useful markers of 
technology adoption strategies and motivations. 

DISCUSSION AND DESIGN IMPLICATIONS 
In 
this  paper,  we  present  a  study  describing  how 
participants used and abandoned a variety of smart devices. 
Below  we  provide  design  recommendations  to  lower 
barriers  and  increase  motivation.  Though  many  of  these 
suggestions  can  lead  to  long-term  use,  we  stress  the 
importance of considering designing for short-term use. 

Lowering Barriers for Users 
When users were able to develop a routine of use that was 
not  obstructed  by  extra  work  or  maintenance,  they  kept 
using devices, even when perceived benefits were minimal. 
While  this  is  not  a  novel  finding,  our  contribution  is  to 
emphasize the enormous importance of lowering barriers of 
use  of  use  for  users  who  are  not  highly  motivated.  We 
outline some ways to lower barriers of use below. 

SESSION: ENGAGEMENT AND DISENGAGEMENT

Encouraging routines 
It is key to help users develop a routine from the first use, 
as participants who were unable to develop a routine of use 
abandoned devices more quickly than those who were able 
to do so. One way of encouraging routines is latching on to 
an  existing  user’s  routine,  for  example  outfitting  a  watch 
that  the  user  wears  every  day  with  a  smart  device. 
Designers should also examine ways to incentivize users to 
develop routines. One approach may be to harness curiosity 
by  revealing  different  metrics  (e.g.  steps  walked,  hours 
slept) as rewards for regular use. This would assist users in 
developing routines of use while simultaneously prolonging 
curiosity, a strong but short-lasting motivator for use. 

Minimizing maintenance 
Charging  and  other  types  of  extra  work/maintenance  often 
led  to  participants  falling  out  of  routines,  after  which  they 
would never use the device again. It seems clear that these 
devices  need  to  be  designed  to  avoid  this  pitfall.  The 
amount of time and effort needed to charge a device was an 
enormous  issue  for  participants.  One  especially  popular 
device in the study, the Misfit Shine, was appreciated due to 
not  needing  to  be  charged  (it  operates  on  a  coin  cell).  We 
recommend that designers consider power approaches such 
as  coin  cells,  which  do  not  require  charging,  or  other 
approaches that require minimal charging.  

Participants  felt  especially  burdened  by  multiple  devices, 
even  when  each  did  not  require  much  effort  individually. 
Additionally, a segment of the current market appears to be 
splintering  into  single-use  devices  (e.g.,  a  bracelet  that 
measures  UV  exposure-  http://www.junebynetatmo.com). 
Based on the data from this study, we contend that a single 
device  should  do  as  much  as  possible  and  allow  users  to 
ignore  or  turn  off  the  unused  features.  Of  course,  packing 
more  functionality  into  one  device  while  seeking  ways  to 
charge the device less is a major engineering challenge. 

Appealing to identity 
Marketing and branding also played a role in whether or not 
participants  embraced  their  devices.    Participants  felt  that 
smart  devices  such  as  activity  trackers  were  for  the  “avid 
health  freak”  (P12)  and  not  for  them.  Marketers  show 
impossibly  slender  models  practicing  yoga  poses  on  the 
beach after jogging a dozen miles, but the lifestyle depicted 
in these images can alienate the user who does not affiliate 
with this image. Previous studies have advised that devices 
be  designed  so  they  do  not  cause  users  to  feel  “out-of-
character” [18] or that casings for trackers be accessorized 
to fit user’s “mood, outfit, or occasion” [22]. We take these 
suggestions a step further to suggest devices be presented to 
users  with  language  and  images  that  fit  their  lifestyles  and 
conceptions  of  themselves.  For  example,  the  rubber  Fitbit 
band  resembles  a  LiveStrong  band,  which  may  be  more 
appropriate for those who identify with an athletic persona. 
Alternate  casings  allow  users  to  wear  Fitbits  that  better 
match their identities, such as a designer who allows users 
to  “Transform  [the]  Fitbit  Flex  tracker  into  a  super  chic 
(http://www.fitbit.com/toryburch).  Designers 
accessory” 

643

should consider the types of images the individuals using it 
wish to project in designing the appearance of the device. 

Increasing Motivation for Users 
However,  even  if  all  barriers  were  lowered,  people  like 
some of the participants in this study might still not engage 
in long-term use of devices for a variety of reasons. These 
devices  and  the  data  they  generate  simply  do  not  fit  their 
needs or motivations. In fact, it appears that barriers to use, 
such  as  extra  work  or  maintenance,  are  especially 
problematic because users perceive so little benefit from the 
devices.  Participants  were  unwilling  to  sacrifice  personal 
comfort  or  convenience  for  the  marginal  benefit  they  got 
from these devices. They were not satisfied seeing data for 
the  sake  of  seeing  data  after  initial  novelty  wore  off,  nor 
were they willing to correlate data or create the rich systems 
seen in studies of highly motivated users (e.g. [5], [16]).  

Additionally, participants did not have the expertise needed 
to find, interpret data, and create plans for action from their 
devices. For example, though many participants had health-
related goals, few expressed an understanding of what types 
of  devices  would  be  appropriate  for  their  health  goal,  how 
to interpret data generated from devices, and what kinds of 
actions  they  should  take  based  on  the  data.  The  following 
four  recommendations  arise  from  the  most  commonly 
expressed desires of our participants. We contend, in all of 
these  cases,  a  unifying  theme  for  a  desire  that  rather  than 
the user, the device should handle the work and complexity. 

Employ user language 
Currently,  many  devices  present  users  with  raw  data  (e.g. 
number of steps). Users wanted a summary using terms and 
language they understood, rather than raw data. They do not 
want  to  interpret  the  data  themselves.  Rather,  participants 
voiced interest for something like a report card, which told 
them  whether  they  had  done  well  or  poorly  that  week. 
Designers  should  investigate  ways  to  provide  this  type  of 
‘report card’ feedback to users, such as by comparing steps 
one week to the previous week or to peers. 

Consider proactive feedback  
Users did not want to have to remember to look at devices, 
as it was not a part of their regular routine and thus served 
as ‘just another thing to remember.’ Notifications could be 
useful  to  these  participants,  particularly  if  location  or 
activity  sensing  is  incorporated  to  minimize  the  chance  of 
disrupting an important activity.  

Coach the user 
Some  participants  did  not  have  the  knowledge  or  skills 
required  to  take  action  and  wanted  to  be  coached  with 
actionable  feedback.  For  example,  the  participants  who 
purchased  sports  sensors  (the  smart  basketball  and  the 
tennis  racket)  were  not  satisfied  with  sensors  that  showed 
them  the  angle  they  had  shot  or  hit  the  ball-  they  wanted 
devices  that  would  actually  instruct  them  to  swing  and 
throw with a better outcome. Designers should consider the 
possibility  that  users  may  not  know  how  to  achieve  their 

goals  or  even  how  to  start  –  incorporating  some  kind  of 
coaching would benefit this class of users.  

Involve the user’s personal history 
Participants  did  not  want  to  do  calculations  to  determine 
their progress or keep track of their historical data, but did 
want devices that were tailored to their personal history. P1 
wanted a system that could factor in that when she had poor 
posture a certain percentage of the day, it often resulted in 
pain,  and 
that 
percentage.  Participants  felt  that  personalized  suggestions 
would be much more useful than generic suggestions.  

tell  her  when  she  was  approaching 

their 

Provide Concrete Motivation 
Some  participants  requested  functions  or  capabilities  that 
lie  beyond  the  current  limits  of  science.  Some  commented 
(semi-jokingly)  that  sensors  would  be  useful  if  they  could 
determine the exact time they would die and what behaviors 
could  prolong 
lives.  Another  participant,  more 
seriously,  said  that  he  wanted  a  sensor  that  would  tell  him 
concretely  that  he  would  have  a  certain  outcome,  rather 
than  offering  vague  assurances  that  he  might  feel  happier. 
While  this  may  not  be  feasible  due  to  uncertainty  in  the 
outcomes  of  different  actions,  it  may  be  helpful  to  utilize 
probabilities  to  motivate  different  behaviors  (for  example, 
‘If you exercise one more day a week, you are 90% likely 
to live 1 year longer’). Though these probabilities may still 
be  considered  too  vague  for  some  users,  they  can  be  more 
concrete than they are currently. 

Reconceptualizing Abandonment as Short Term Use 
The  recommendations  above  are  particularly  pertinent  to 
encourage long-term use of devices (though we believe they 
are  good  practice  in  general).  Designing  for  long-term  use 
is vital for devices that must be used regularly (e.g. such as 
glucose  monitors)  or  for  users  who  are  willing  and 
interested in using devices long term.  

Despite  the  benefits  of  long-term  use  of  devices,  our 
analysis leads us to believe that there is an under-explored 
class of smart devices, particularly for wearables: those that 
might  be  beneficial  for  short-term  interventions.  This 
approach  challenges  the  dominant  paradigm  of  designing 
for  long-term,  continuous  use  and  echoes  Rooksby  et  al. 
that posit, “to track over the short term is not necessarily to 
give  up  or  fail”  [21].  Participants  experienced  many 
benefits from short-term use that may, indeed, lead to long-
term changes. Yet these devices are marketed for continual 
and  everyday  use.  Even  when  the  participants  had  learned 
something  useful  or  made  a  behavior  change,  participants 
internalized abandonment of devices as failure.  

Additionally, elements of devices that are obtrusive or even 
irritating  may  be  extremely  helpful  in  the  short  term  but 
unsustainable in the long term. Some users benefited when 
devices were obtrusive- such as posture sensors that buzzed 
when they detected bad posture- but sustained use of these 
devices  annoyed 
to 
abandonment.  While  not  appropriate  for  all  users  and  all 

long  run  and 

them 

the 

led 

in 

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

devices, short-term use is appropriate for those interested in 
devices  to  satisfy  curiosity  as  well  as  those  who  wish  to 
alter  routines  or  behaviors.  Obtrusiveness  and  deviation 
from  routine  are  not  as  off-putting  when  occasional. 
Curiosity  and  the  desire  for  novelty  can  continue  to  be 
satisfied when participants are not jaded by continual use.  

We  stress  that  short-term  use  and  abandonment  can  be  an 
effective use of smart devices when users are able to more 
deeply  understand  or  alter  habits  and  routines.  Unlinking 
abandonment of devices with failure raises bigger questions 
about  the  intended  future  of  these  devices:  is  the  goal  to 
create smart sensing systems that are continuously relevant 
and  useful  to  a  user  or  is  the  goal  to  create  a  device  that 
supports a user’s need even if that need is temporary? Can 
we allow learning about ourselves to occur in spurts and not 
only  as  a  continual  everyday  process?   Do  we  envision  a 
future where we are dependent on our devices to keep us on 
track or do we see these devices as a tool for learning how 
to  manage  our  lives  and  health  ourselves?  We  propose 
embracing  a  short-term  intervention  mentality  to  broaden 
the  market  for  these  devices,  while  supporting  designs 
better suited to the lived practices of the everyday user. 

Already,  the  amount  of  electronic  waste  has  a  staggering 
effect  on  the  environment  as  well  as  the  individuals  who 
live where technology is processed and recycled (e.g. [27]), 
and  the  amount  of  time  electronic  devices  are  used  before 
they  are  discarded  continues  to  shorten  [26].  In  pursuing 
this  area  of  research,  it  is  important  to  reflect  on  and 
explore ways to create devices that will be used short term 
and  discarded 
in  an  environmentally  and  ethically 
responsible  manner,  such  as  through  the  use  of  water-
soluble electronics [28].  

reasons 

CONCLUSION 
In  this  paper,  we  present  a  study  detailing  a  group  of 
for 
participants’  motivations,  practices,  and 
abandonments of smart devices for a group of participants. 
The  paper  contributes  novel  reasons  that  users  use  and 
abandon smart devices. By allowing participants  to choose 
devices  and  then  interviewing  them  several  months  later, 
we were able to see the ways people integrated devices into 
their lives or abandoned them and the factors for doing so. 
Based  on  what  we  learned  from  these  participants,  we 
present  design  recommendations  to  lower  barriers  and 
encourage  use.  We  also  acknowledge  that  long-term  use 
may  not  be  feasible  for  some  users  and  purposes  and 
propose  short-term  interventions  as  one  way  of  increasing 
the  usefulness  of  devices  for  users.  These  findings  have 
implications  for  the  design  of  the  next  generation  of  smart 
devices that more closely meet the needs of users. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We  thank  those  who  participated  in  this  study.  This  work 
was  supported  by 
the  National  Science  Foundation 
Graduate Research Fellowship (DGE-1256082). 

644

SESSION: ENGAGEMENT AND DISENGAGEMENT

REFERENCES 
1.  Ananthanarayan, S., Sheh, M., Chien, A., Profita, H., and 
Siek, K. Pt Viz: towards a wearable device for visualizing 
knee  rehabilitation  exercises.  In Proceedings  of 
the 
SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing 
Systems. ACM Press (2013) 1247-1250. 

2.  Ananthanarayan,  S.,  Lapinski,  N.,  Siek,  K.,  and  
Eisenberg,  M.  Towards  the  crafting  of  personal  health 
technologies.  In Proceedings  of  the  2014  conference  on 
Designing  interactive  systems.  ACM  Press  (2014)  587-
596.  

3.  Axelrod,  L.,  Fitzpatrick,  G.,  Balaam,  M,  Mawson,  S., 
Burridge,  J.,  Ricketts,  I.,  Smith,  P.  P.,  &  Rodden,  T.  A 
Toolkit  to  Explore  Lived  Experience  of  Motivation: 
the 
When  Words  are  Not  Enough.  In  Proc.  Of 
International  Conference  on  Pervasive  Computing 
Technologies  for  Healthcare  (PervasiveHealth).  (2011) 
32-39. 

4.  Barreto, M. L., Szóstek, A., Karapanos, E., Nunes, N. J., 
Pereira,  L.,  &  Quintal,  F.  Understanding  families’ 
motivations  for  sustainable  behaviors.  Computers  in 
Human Behavior 40 (2014), 6-15. 

5.  Choe,  E.K.,  Lee,  N.B.,  Lee,  B.,  Pratt,  W.,  and  Kientz, 
J.A.  Understanding  Quantified-selfers’  Practices 
in 
Collecting  and  Exploring  Personal  Data.  In  Proc.  of  the 
SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing 
Systems, ACM Press (2014), 1143-1152. 

6.  Consolvo, S., Klasnja, P., McDonald, D.W., and Landay, 
J.A.  Goal-setting 
persuasive 
technologies  that  encourage  physical  activity.  In  Proc. 
Persuasive, ACM Press (2009). 

considerations 

for 

7.  Consolvo, S., McDonald, D.W., Toscos, T., Chen, M.Y., 
Froehlich,  J.,  Harrison,  B.,  Klasnja,  P.,  LaMarca,  A., 
LeGrand,  L.,  Libby,  R.,  Smith,  I.,  and  Landay,  J.A. 
Activity sensing in the wild: a field trial of ubifit garden. 
In Proc. of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems. ACM Press (2008), 1797-1806. 

8.  Fahrni,  T.,  Kuhn,  M.,  Sommer,  P.,  Wattenhofer,  R.,  and 
Welten,  S.  Sundroid:  solar  radiation  awareness  with 
smartphones.  In Proceedings  of  the  13th  international 
conference on Ubiquitous computing. ACM Press (2011), 
365-374.  

9.  Fritz, T., Huang, E.M., Murphy, G.C., and Zimmermann, 
T. Persuasive Technology in the Real World: A Study of 
Long-term  Use  of  Activity  Sensing  Devices  for  Fitness. 
In Proc. of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, ACM Press (2014), 487–496. 

10. Froehlich,  J.,  Dillahunt,  T.,  Klasnja,  P.,  Mankoff,  J., 
Consolvo,  S.,  Harrison,  B.,  and  Landay,  J.A.  UbiGreen: 
Investigating a Mobile Tool for Tracking and Supporting 
Green  Transportation  Habits.  In  Proc.  of  the  SIGCHI 
Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems, 
ACM Press (2009), 1043–1052. 

11. Gram-Hanssen, K. Consuming technologies – developing 
routines. Journal of Cleaner Production 16 (2008), 1181-
1189. 

12. Grönvall,  E.,  Verdezoto,  N.  Beyond  Self-Monitoring: 
Understanding  Non-functional  Aspects  of  Home-based 
Healthcare Technology. In Proc. of the 15th international 
conference on Ubiquitous computing, ACM Press (2013), 
587-596. 

13.  Jackson,  T.  Motivating  Sustainable  Consumption:  a 
review  of  evidence  on  consumer  behavior  and 
behavioural  change:  a 
the  Sustainable 
Development  Research  Network  (White  paper).  Center 
for Environmental Strategy, 2005. 

report 

to 

14. Klasnja,  P.,  Pratt,  W.  Managing  Health  With  Mobile 

Technology. Interactions 21, 1 (2014), 66-69. 

15. Ledger,  D.,  and  McCaffrey,  D.  Inside  Wearables:  How 
the Science of Human Behavior Change Offers the Secret 
to  Long-Term  Engagement  (White  paper).  Endeavor 
Partners LLC (2014). 

16. Li,  I.,  Dey,  A.,  and  Forlizzi,  J.  A  Stage-based  Model  of 
Personal  Informatics  Systems.  In  Proc.  of  the  SIGCHI 
Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing  Systems, 
ACM Press (2010), 557–566. 

supporting 

17. Li,  I.,  Dey,  A.,  and  Forlizzi,  J.  Understanding  my  data, 
myself: 
ubicomp 
technologies.   In Proceedings  of  the  13th  international 
conference on Ubiquitous computing, ACM Press (2011), 
405-414. 

self-reflection  with 

18. Lim,  B.Y.,  Shick,  A.,  Harrison,  C.,  and  Hudson.  S.E.. 
2010.  Pediluma:  motivating  physical  activity  through 
contextual 
influence. 
In Proceedings  of  the  fifth  international  conference  on 
Tangible,  embedded,  and  embodied  interaction (TEI). 
ACM Press (2011), 173-180. 

information 

social 

and 

19. Lin,  J.J.,  Mamykina,  L.,  Lindtner,  S.,  Delajoux,  G.,  and 
Strub,  H.B.  Fish'n'Steps:  encouraging  physical  activity 
with an interactive computer game. In Proceedings of the 
8th  international  conference  on  Ubiquitous  Computing. 
ACM Press (2006), 261-278. 

20. Macvean,  A.  and  Robertson,  J.  Understanding  exergame 
users'  physical  activity,  motivation  and  behavior  over 
time.  In Proc.  of  the  SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human 
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM Press (2013), 1251-
1260.  

21. Rooksby, J., Rost, M., Morrison, A., and Chalmers, M.C. 
Personal  tracking  as  lived  informatics.  In  Proc.  of  the 
SIGCHI  Conference  on  Human  Factors  in  Computing 
Systems, ACM Press (2014), 1163–1172. 

22. Shih, P.C., Han, K., Poole, E.S., Rosson, M. B., Carroll, 
J.M.  Use  and  adoption  challenges  of  wearable  activity 
trackers. In iConference Proceedings (2015). 

23. Sung,  J.,  Christensen,  H.I.,  and  Grinter,  R.E.  Robots  in 
the wild: understanding long-term use. In Proceedings of 

645

the  4th  ACM/IEEE  international  conference  on  Human 
robot interaction, ACM Press (2009), 45-52.  

waste.  Environmental  Impact  Assessment  Review  25 
(2005), 436-458. 

UBICOMP '15, SEPTEMBER 7–11, 2015, OSAKA, JAPAN

27. Wong,  M.H.,  Wu,  S.C.,  Deng,  W.J.,  Yu,  X.Z.,  Luo,  Q., 
Leung,  A.O.W.,  Wong,  C.S.C,  Luksemburg,  W.  J., 
Wong, A.S. Export of toxic chemicals – A review of the 
recycling. 
case 
Environmental Pollution 149 (2007), 131-140. 

electronic-waste 

uncontrolled 

of 

28.  Yin,  L.,  Bozler,  C.,  Harburg,  D.  V.,  Omenetto,  F.,  & 
Rogers,  J.  A.  Materials  and  fabrication  sequences  for 
water  soluble  silicon  integrated  circuits  at  the  90nm 
mode. Applied Physics Letters 106 (2015). 

24. Ur,  B.,  Jung,  J.,  Schechter,  S. 

Intruders  versus 
intrusiveness:  teens’  and  parents’  perspectives  on  home-
entryway  surveillance.  In Proceedings  of 
the  ACM 
International  Joint  Conference  on  Pervasive  and 
Ubiquitous Computing. ACM Press (2014), 129-139. 

25. Walsh,  G.  and  Golbeck,  J.  StepCity:  a  preliminary 
investigation of a personal informatics-based social game 
on  behavior  change.  In Extended  Abstracts  on  Human 
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM Press (2014), 2371-
2376. 

26.  Widmer,  R.,  Oswald-Krapf,  H.,  Sinha-Khetriwal,  D., 
Schnellmann,  M.,  Böni,  H.  Global  perspectives  on  e-

646

 
 
